ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements
Measurements of loudspeakers directivity patterns with ARTA
Preparation for measurement
For the assessment of loudspeaker drivers and loudspeaker systems, in addition to the axial frequency
response there is also the radiation of the axis. This application note
describes useful procedures for the measurement of the directivity patters
of loudspeakers.
Usually the speaker is measured on a turntable with a scale to show the
angle (see Figure 1.). To obtain the full-sphere characteristics, individual
frequency responses have to be given for each angle increment.
The measurement microphone should be positioned so that it is aimed
exactly at 0° with respect to the center (e.g., dust cap) of the loudspeaker
frame or to some other specified point of reference (see Figure 2).
It is important to ensure that the chosen reference point for rotation does
not change. This can be done, for example, by having the center of the
baffle be positioned directly over the center of the turntable. (see Figure
2b).
If this precaution is not followed some annoying corrections will be
needed. The non-central positioning of the sound source, or rather the
sound propagation point, leads to the fact that, depending on the angle of
rotation, the distance will change (see Fig. 2b) and thus different levels will
be measured. This would have to be corrected after the measurement. In
this case each individual measurement would have to be scaled to a one
Figure 1. LS on turntable
meter distance. In addition to following the above, all rules for making
measurements in reflective environments should be applied. It is important to ensure that that the
loudspeaker is positioned in the measurement space so that it is as far away as possible from the walls
and other reflecting objects.

a)

b)
Figure 2. Placement of the loudspeaker on the turntable (top view)

Page 1 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements
How to do the measurement
How to run measurements with ARTA should already be known. To get a reasonable picture of the
radiation the angular increment should not be too large. Usual measurement intervals are 5º or 10º,
thus requiring 72 or 36 measurements. If the source has a symmetrical structure it is sufficient if only
one half is measured, either the left or the right relative to the principle axis. This reduces the number
of measurements to 18 or 36.

Figure 3. Individual frequency responses of loudspeaker from 0 to 60° in 10° increments
It should be evident that the measurement for all angles cannot be done in 5 minutes; some time
should be taken with it. If it is desired to make many
such measurements it is recommended that a
turntable be constructed. An example is given in the
annex of the german or spanish version..
A special feature of the measurement which hasn’t
yet been explained is that the data is stored using a
special nomenclature for the file name. It is
composed as follows: Name_degSignAngle.pir
where Sign is '+' or '-', and Angle is given in degrees.

Page 2 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements
Evaluation of the measurement results
Select “directivity plot” from the file-handling menu.

This command will open "Directivity graph" window. The file menu in this window gives us
following options:
If you you want to evaluate your measurement data the first
time, select menu comand “Create directivity file”.
Records which have already been edited can be opened as ".dpf"
files (directivity pattern file).
Two export options are available to enable the processing or use
of the data in other programs. The data can be exported as
ASCII with either 1/3 or 1/1 octave frequenncy resolution.
Returning to the first analysis of test data, see Figure 4a to see
the ARTA test data sorted by ascending angle. This works
only if you adhere strictly to the given nomenclature.

Figure 4.a Dialog Box “Directivity data definition”

In the section "Magnitude" the following must be selected (see Figure 4b):
•
•
•

Degree of Smoothing (1/3 to 1/12 octave)
Whether all of the data should be normalized relative to the 0° measurement
Whether the test data for negative angle measurement should be mirrored

The section “Frequency Range” should be self-explanatory. It is especially important, however, to
ensure that the chosen lower frequency limit is a sensible choice.

Page 3 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

Figure 4.b ”Directivity data definition” Dialog box.
The section “FFT Analysis” determines how the data is evaluated. Three different options are
offered:
•
•
•

The analysis begins with the auto-detect first peak in the impulse response
The analysis begins with the starting position of the impulse response graph
The analysis takes into account a window using the selected starting position and length of the
window. In this case it is possible to hide the region and thus have free-field conditions.

The estimation of the reflection-free window is discussed in Application Note No. 4. With a normal
ceiling height of 2.50 m, a measurement height one half of the room height and a measuring distance
of about one meter, the window should be about 4.5 ms.
Click “OK” if the analysis of the data is correct. Choose the dialog box “directivity graph” with the
following selection at the lower left side of the dialog box:
The choices for Mode are the classic analysis,
a Polar plot, two kinds of waterfall charts, or a
sonogram.
With the Palette one can design the color type
of the graph and with Range the resolution in
dB. Examples are given below of the effect of
the selected parameters. With the “Color” checkbox you can choose whether the charts should be
displayed in color or monochrome. “Contoured” controls the moving color transition between the
groups of levels, this chart has the character of an isobar diagram.

Page 4 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements
Directivity pattern types
Polar pattern
We will start to display types of directivity patterns with the traditional display, the polar pattern.
Choose either the notation "Polar
Full" or "Polar Half."
You will see the left top
representation for the selected
frequency if "Polar Full" is
chosen.
Frequency is chosen in the polar
plot panel by changing the control
"Frequency" in 1/3 octave steps.
The level axis can be manipulated
with control “Top div”.

Polar Full

Polar Half

The check box "Ref -> 0dB”
determines whether the pattern is
normalized relative to the 0 degree
level or not.
The checkbox "Show DI" determines whether
directivity parameters: frequency - f, directivity factor Q, directivity index - DI and -6dB angle will be shown
below the polar diagram
The directivity factor Q is estimated as a ratio of sound
intensity at reference angle to intensity that will be
produced by point source that radiate the same power
as directional one, at same distance.
The directivity index DI is calculated by DI = 10 log Q
(dB). It is equal to difference of sound pressure level at
reference angle to sound pressure level produced by
point source with equal power and at same position.

For calculation of the radiator sound power, we need to assume the type of radiator spatial directivity
pattern. Combo box “Directivity type” offers two types of patterns: Cylindrical and Spherical.
Cylindrical pattern is used for tall sound columns, while spherical pattern is used for loudspeakers
with circular drivers. Estimation will be correct if radiation is symmetric to reference axis (0 degree).
The DI can be also estimated for loudspeaker mounted in an infinite baffle. ARTA do it automatically
if finds that measurements are done for angles from -90 to 90 degrees. For the free field full space
estimation measurements should be done for angles from 0 to 360 degrees or from -180 to 180
degrees.
With Overlay button the active curves can be saved as overlay
After selecting "Overlay", the "Polar Overlay Manager” (see Figure 5),
with any chosen frequency as an overlay shown separately on or off,
deleted or added. With “Color” the colors of the curves in the framework
of the color palette are modifiable.

Page 5 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

Figure 5. The Overlay Function

Other types of representation which are supported are discussed in the summary
below. It covers the basic ways as well as instructions in the form of examples for the
special features and their respective presentations. In addition, there are various
practical examples which show the influence of a variation in parameter.

Page 6 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

Waterfall 2, color

Waterfall 2

Waterfall 1

Waterfall

not normalized

measurement normalized to 0°

Figure 6. The waterfall display
The waterfall display is a form of presentation chart in which each frequency response measurement is
displayed as a ‘slice’ corresponding to each angle. It is available in two versions.
In Waterfall 1, all measuring curves are shown from the frequency axis (side view) and in Waterfall 2
from the angle axis view (front). This has the effect that special features of the measurement can be
identified better from different perspectives. The waterfall chart can also be displayed in color, with
the level indicated by color information.
As additional variation is the normalization relative to the axial (0° measurement) frequency response.
Note that only differences relative to 0° measurement are shown.

Page 7 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

with contour

without contour

Sonogram

not normalized

measurement normalized to 0°

Figure 7. The sonogram representation
The sonogram display type is quite vivid. The levels are expressed through color differences.
The colors can be found on the "Palette” menu in the framework of the offer varies. By default, "Jet"
red zones for high level and blue tones for low-level zones.
The "Contour" checkbox determines whether you will see smooth color transitions, or abrupt
transitions with strong contrasts. The contrasting view is generally easier to interpret.
There is again the option of normalization relative to the 0° response. This is shown in the right half
of Figure 7. It should be made clear that in this presentation the normalization to a constant level is an
illusion, which is not representative of reality. It is recommended that both types be displayed side by
side to aid the interpretation. Compare the examples shown in Figure 10 through Figure 13.

Page 8 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

measurement normalized to 0°

not normalized

Choice of the resolution

25 dB Resolution

10 dB Resolution

Figure 8. The influence of level resolution

The appearance of the charts is strongly influenced by the choice of level resolution. There are two
examples in Figure 8, each with a 25 dB and a 10 dB axis. At first glance, it looks as if the charts on
the left half have nothing to do with the diagrams on the right half.
Experimenting a little with the parameters is recommended, especially for first-time users of this
function.

Page 9 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

Normalized to 0°

Not normalized

Smoothing

1/1 Octave Smoothing

1/12 Octave Smoothing

Figure 9. The influence of the choice of smoothing
The choice of smoothing has a significant influence on the clarity of presentation.
Figure 9 shows graphs with the smallest and largest possible choice of smoothing. Too much
smoothing removes all the detail whereas a low degree of smoothing makes the graph difficult to
interpret.
It is recommended to experiment with these parameters.

Page 10 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements
Practical Examples

c) ALTO

b) Desperado

a) LS1A

The following are some practical measured examples. They are intended as demonstration and training
materials.

normalized to 0°
Figure 10.

not normalized

Practice (two-way boxes)
a) and b) with symmetric response
c) with asymmetric response

Figure 10 has three different two-way boxes. Figure 10c is the asymmetrical structure of the box very
clear to see. Such effects are amplified by normalizing to 0 °.

Page 11 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE

Tweeter with waveguide

FRS8 in 1 Liter-Box

No 6: Directivity Measurements

Normalized to 0°

Not normalized

Figure 11. Broad-band speaker and tweeter with wave guide

MHD 152 horn driver

Figure 11 shows the measurements for two very different individual speakers, an 8 cm wide-band
driver in a small 1-Liter box and a tweeter with wave guide. This is makes it particularly clear that the
standard presentation without further information can lead to mistaken conclusions.

horizontal

vertical

Figure 12. high frequency horn, measured horizontally and vertically
Figure 12 shows the analysis of measurements on a tweeter horn for angles from ±90° horizontally and
vertically.

Page 12 of 13

ARTA - APPLICATION NOTE
No 6: Directivity Measurements

not normalized

normalized to 0°

Figure 13. Dodecahedron directivity pattern
Figures 13 and Figure 14 show the analysis of measurements on a dodecahedral loudspeaker. The
omnidirectional nature of this source is clearly visible in all types of display.

Figure 14. Dodecahedron, Polar diagram

Page 13 of 13

