eprints@whiterose.ac.uk
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk
Universities of Leeds, Sheffield and York

Deposited via The University of York.
White Rose Research Online URL for this paper:
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/id/eprint/153179/
Version: Accepted Version
Article:
Lovedee-Turner, Michael James and Murphy, Damian Thomas (2019) 3D Reflector
Localisation and Room Geometry Estimation using a Spherical Microphone Array. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. pp. 1-15. ISSN: 1520-8524
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.5130569

Reuse
Items deposited in White Rose Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless
indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by
national copyright laws. The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of
the full text version. This is indicated by the licence information on the White Rose Research Online record
for the item.
Takedown
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by
emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request.

3D Reﬂector Localisation and Room Geometry
Estimation using a Spherical Microphone Array
Michael Lovedee-Turner1, a) and Damian Murphy1
AudioLab, Communication Technologies Research Group, Department of Electronic Engineering,
University of York, UK

The analysis of room impulse responses to localise reﬂecting surfaces and estimate room geometry is applicable in numerous aspects of acoustics, including source localisation, acoustic
simulation, spatial audio, audio forensics, and room acoustic treatment. Geometry inference
is an acoustic analysis problem where information about reﬂections extracted from impulse
responses are used to localise reﬂective boundaries present in an environment, and thus
estimate the geometry of the room. This problem however becomes more complex when
considering non-convex rooms, as room shape can not be constrained to a subset of possible
convex polygons. This paper presents a geometry inference method for localising reﬂective
boundaries and inferring the room’s geometry for convex and non-convex room shapes. The
method is tested using simulated room impulse responses for seven scenarios, and real-world
room impulse responses measured in a cuboid-shaped room, using a spherical microphone
array containing multiple spatially distributed channels capable of capturing both time- and
direction-of-arrival. Results show that the general shape of the rooms is inferred for each
case, with a higher degree of accuracy for convex shaped rooms. However, inaccuracies generally arise as a result of the complexity of the room being inferred, or inaccurate estimation
of time- and direction-of-arrival of reﬂections.
c 2019 Acoustical Society of America.
[http://dx.doi.org(DOI number)]
[XYZ]

Pages: 1–13

I. INTRODUCTION

A room impulse response (RIR) is the characteristic
response of a room to excitation from a known broadband
test signal. These RIRs are comprised of a superposition
of the direct source-to-receiver component, discrete early
reﬂections produced through limited interactions with
boundaries within the room, and a densely-distributed
and exponentially decaying reverberant ﬁeld. RIRs are
therefore representations of the reverberant characteristics of a room, and are uniquely deﬁned by the geometric constraints of the room and the source/receiver locations. This property makes RIRs an invaluable resource
for acoustic analysis and acoustic scene rendering. One
key application for RIR analysis is geometry inference a form of acoustic analysis focusing on the estimation of
a room’s geometry from the reﬂections captured across a
number RIRs. The ability to create an accurate model
of the geometric constraints of a given room has numerous further applications in acoustics ranging from: sound
source localisation, room acoustic simulation, spatial audio, audio forensics, and the acoustic treatment of rooms.
Geometry inference algorithms can typically be split into
one of two categories1 : image-source reversion1–5 and direct localisation1,6–10 .

a) mjlt500@york.ac.uk; Funding was provided by a UK Engineering

and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Doctoral Training Award.
Code will be made available at: 10.5281/zenodo.2563643

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

Previous work has been shown to be able to infer
the geometry of a room from a set of RIRs, however,
they are only presented for the case of a simple cuboid
room, and in some cases require large numbers of RIRs to
work successfully. Furthermore, most do not present error management techniques for reducing the impact that
inaccurately detected reﬂections or incorrectly computed
reﬂection paths have on the inferred geometry.
In this paper the problem of geometry inference is
considered from the perspective of both convex and nonconvex 3D room shapes, which has not been considered previously in the literature. To achieve this the
Eigenbeam Detection and Evaluation of SimultaneouslyArriving Reﬂections (EDESAR) reﬂection detection
method is proposed based on spherical harmonic decomposition of spatial room impulse responses (SRIRs),
which allows simultaneously arriving reﬂections from different direction-of-arrivals (DoA) to be detected as individual reﬂections. Furthermore, an extension to existing image-source reversion techniques is proposed, the
Acoustic Reﬂection Cartographer method. A geometry
validation process is then proposed to reﬁne the inferred
room’s geometry to ideally that of the desired room.
The following assumptions are made when inferring the
room’s geometry,
• Source-receiver distance and room temperature are
known a priori
• There is at least a 50 cm distance from the source
and receiver to the boundaries (half the standard

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

1

measurement distance17 allowing for analysis of
smaller/complex rooms)
• Reﬂections have a dominant specular component
• Boundaries deﬁne a closed room
• Floor and ceiling are parallel to each other
• Walls are perpendicular to both the ﬂoor and ceiling
The paper is organised as follows: section II presents
background literature in the ﬁeld of geometry inference, section III presents the problem formulation and
proposed methodology, section IV discusses the testing
methodology employed to assess the proposed methods
accuracy, section V and VI will present and discuss the
results, and section VII concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND

Image-source reversion deﬁnes the set of techniques
that ﬁrst estimate the locations of image-sources from
the ToA, and in some cases DoA, of reﬂections arriving
at one or more receivers1 .
Dokmanic et al.2 proposed a technique exploiting the
properties of Euclidean distance matrices to search for reﬂections with a common image-source across RIRs measured at ﬁve receiver locations, each positioned such that
they receive a ﬁrst-order reﬂection from each wall. The
image-source locations are then deﬁned as the common
point of intersection across spheres centred around the
receiver positions, with radius values derived from the
ToA for each reﬂection. This method required a priori
knowledge of the source and receiver position, and assumed that the room was convex in shape.
Arteaga et al.3 used the source-receiver distance and
reverberation time computed from a measured RIR to
deﬁne the geometries for a set of possible cuboid rooms.
The RIR for these possible rooms are simulated using the
image-source method, and a goodness-of-ﬁt is computed
between the simulated and measured RIRs to ﬁnd the
cuboid room that produces a RIR similar to that measured.
Ribeiro et al.4 used a least-squares minimisation
technique to ﬁt synthetically generated reﬂections to a
measured RIR. This process detects a sparse set of reﬂections with approximately known DoA. Image-sources
are then generated from the ToA and DoA, the boundary locations are then estimated from the image-source
positions. These boundaries are only considered valid
if at least one second- or third-order reﬂection is also
detected for the boundary. This technique assumed a
convex-shaped room when inferring the rooms shape, and
required a priori knowledge of the source and receiver
positions, and the microphone arrays response to signals
from a grid diﬀerent DoA.
Tervo and Tossavainen5 employed a maximum likelihood approach to ﬁnd the location of the image-source
2

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

that maximised a utility function from a randomly generated set of points in space. The ﬁst-order reﬂections
were used to deﬁne the locations of the boundaries. If an
already deﬁned plane can be used to deﬁne the location
of an image-source it is assumed to be a higher-order reﬂection and is ignored. This approach assumed that the
room is convex in shape, and that each RIR contains a
discrete detectable ﬁrst-order reﬂection from each boundary.
Remaggi et al.1 used an adaptation of the Dynamic
Programming Projected Phase-Slope Algorithm11 to detect reﬂections in a RIR, and a delay-and-sum beamformer to ﬁnd the DoA. The image-source locations are
then deﬁned in the spherical coordinate domain using
the azimuth, elevation, and ToA computed for each reﬂection. Remaggi et al. assumed that the source and all
image-sources were at least 2.1 m away from the microphone array, and that at least four measurement positions existed - although more were used in testing.
Alternatively, direct localisation techniques aim to
infer boundary positions directly without extracting further information about the reﬂection paths1 .
Remaggi et al.1 and Nastasia et al.7 , used ToA to
deﬁne ellipsoids with foci on the source and receiver locations, which are known a priori. Through RIR measurements at diﬀerent source and/or receiver locations,
a boundary is deﬁned as being at the point where there
is a common tangent across ellipsoids produced by a reﬂection common across all RIRs. Assumnptions made by
Remaggiet al. are as above. Nastasia et al. assumed a
minimum and maximum reﬂector distance from the origin to remove unwanted planes.
Kuster et al.6 proposed a technique based on inversewave ﬁeld extrapolation of reﬂections captured using a
linear-array of microphones. The use of large numbers of
measurement positions allowed the approach to produce
a detailed mapping of a single boundary in an environment.
Filos et al.8 proposed a method for estimating room
geometry using a seven microphone array split into three
sub-arrays of ﬁve microphones. Each sub-array is positioned to localise planes on two axes, xy, xz, and yz,
and RIRs are captured using a source position for each
boundary in the room. The Hough transform is then
used to ﬁnd the line that is tangential to each ellipse deﬁned by the ToA for the ﬁrst arriving reﬂection in each
RIR set. Intersections between the infered lines are then
used to deﬁne the room’s geometry8 . However, the array
type used limits this approach to geometry inference to
the case of convex rooms.
Zamaninezhad et al.9 estimated the distances between two reﬂective boundaries from the location of the
main resonant frequencies within the frequency domain
representation of the RIR, the room transfer function.
The main resonant frequency is detected through minimisation of a cost function of the possible resonances within
the measured room transfer function. To infer the location of the boundaries, it is assumed that one boundary
is deﬁned at x = 0 which is closer to the source.

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

Baba et al.10 proposed an extension to the ellipsoid
based methods. Firstly, they proposed the use of a linear
Radon transform, an image processing algorithm used
for line detection, to locate common reﬂections across
a stacked set of RIRs measured across multiple loudspeaker positions. Knowledge of the array geometry and
ToA is then used to create an image-microphone. The
point of reﬂection is then located as the point of intersection between the ellipse and a line going from the imagemicrophone to the source. It is assumed that each wall
has a uniform-linear loudspeaker array parallel to it, and
therefore the geometry of the room is constrained to the
geometry of the loudspeaker array.
These methods require multiple measured RIRs
recorded at diﬀerent points in the room, with precise positioning of each source and receiver so that a discrete and
detectable ﬁrst-order reﬂection for each boundary exists.
This inherently limits the application of these methods to
convex rooms, where the source and receiver placement
requirements can be met, and allows boundaries that are
not detected across the RIRs to be removed. This, however, does not hold for non-convex shaped rooms, where
boundaries will not necessarily be visible to all source
and receiver positions.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION AND METHOD

Spherical microphone arrays measure the sound pressure on the surface of a rigid sphere, spatially sampled
at the microphone positions distributed across this surface. Given a spherical microphone array, the sound ﬁeld
on the surface of the sphere can be deﬁned using spherical harmonics12 . In the time-domain, when assuming
frequency independent reﬂection, the RIR H(t) can be
represented as a superposition of Dirac deltas δ steered
by the spherical harmonic vector y(Ψi ) in the azimuth
and elevation DoA, Ψ = [θ, φ], of the arriving direct
sound and reﬂections, with amplitude α and time-ofarrival (ToA) τ , with the addition of the time-variant
residual noise component R(t) as,
H(t) =

∞
X
i=1

y(Ψi )αi δ(t − τi ) + R(t)

(1)

where the spherical harmonics column vector of order N ,
y(Ψ), contains the (N + 1)2 spherical harmonics12 ,
M
y(Ψ) = [y00 (Ψ), y1−1 (Ψ), y10 (Ψ), y11 (Ψ), ..., yN
(Ψ)]T

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

(2)

where (.)T denotes transposition and the real valued
spherical harmonic of order n and degree m, ynm , is computed as14 ,
q
√
2n+1 (n−m)! m

Pn (cosφ) 2cos(mθ),


4π
(n+m)!
q
2n+1 (n−m)! m
ynm =
4π (n+m)! Pn (cosφ),

q


 2n+1 (n−m)! P m (cosφ)√2sin(mθ)

if m > 0
if m = 0

if m < 0
(3)
where Pnm is the associated Legendre polynomial of order
n and degree m.
Through analysis of the spatiotemporal attributes
of the reﬂections in the SRIR H, the DoA and ToA
for individual reﬂections can be extracted. This information can then be used to deﬁne the locale of imagesources that produce the reﬂections arriving at the receiver. The boundary location can then be estimated
from the image-source, and the previous-source that was
mirrored in the boundary to produce the image-source,
by exploiting the properties of the image-source method.
That is, as an image-source is produced by mirroring the previous-source perpendicularly across a boundary, the distance from previous-source-to-boundary and
boundary-to-image-source are equal, and the line between the previous-source and image-source is parallel
e
to the boundary’s normal. A point on the boundary b
2
e can therefore, from , be
and the boundary’s normal n
estimated as,
4π

(n+m)!

n

s+s
e=e
b
2
e
s−s
e=
n
||e
s − s||

(4)
(5)

e is a point on the candidate boundary, n
e is the
where b
candidate boundary’s normal, e
s is the location of an
image-source, and s is the source location.
Therefore, there are two main stages to the adopted
approach: the analysis of the spatiotemporal information contained in the SRIRs (subsection III A), and the
inference of the room’s geometry from this information
(subsection III B).
A. Eigenbeam Detection and Evaluation of Simultaneously
Arriving Reﬂections

To extract the spatiotemporal information, a reﬂection detection and analysis technique using spherical
beampatterns (eigenbeams) is proposed, the Eigenbeam
Detection and Evaluation of Simultaneously Arriving Reﬂections (EDESAR) method.
The proposed method analyses the SRIR iteratively
over windowed time-frames of 0.45 ms with a 50% frame
overlap. These short time-frames allow for reﬂections arriving from close DoAs but diﬀerent ToA to be easily
detected separately. Before any analysis of the impulse

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

3

response is performed, the SRIR is normalised to have a
maximum sample magnitude of ±1. To reduce the impact of noise, and reduce the likelihood of false positive
detections, time-frames are ignored if they have a maximum sample value across all channels less than a deﬁned
threshold value ǫa .
The time-frames being analysed are windowed using
a Hann window then low-pass ﬁltered at 5 kHz, and highpass ﬁltered at 100 Hz, reducing the impact of diﬀuse
spectral components as a result of the spatial Nyquist
frequency18 , 8 kHz as quoted for the EigenMike EM3219
as used in this study.
The diﬀuseness proﬁle for each time-frame is then
computed using the Covariance Matrix Eigenvalue Diffuseness Estimation (COMEDIE) algorithm20 as implemented in the Spherical-Array-Processing Toolbox (‘getDiﬀuseness CMD’ )14 . This diﬀuseness estimator was
chosen based on results presented in20 , which showed
that the COMEDIE algorithm produced a more robust
estimate of diﬀuseness as a result of being able to disambiguate between multiple correlated/uncorrelated sound
sources and spatially diﬀuse noise20 . To determine the
diﬀuseness of a time-frame the diﬀuseness proﬁle is computed for each spherical harmonic order (up to thirdorder in this study), and if a time-frame has any diffuseness proﬁles greater than the threshold value ǫd it
is ignored. This reduces the likelihood of inaccuracies
in ToA and DoA estimation, as a result of the number
of signals or the signal-to-noise ratio, which would impact the algorithms ability to infer reﬂection paths, and
therefore boundary locations.
To detect directional signals within the ﬁltered timeframe, the Minimum Variance Distortionless Response
(MVDR) beamformer21 , based on the ‘sphMVDR’ function in the Spherical-Array-Processing toolbox14 , is used.
The MVDR beamformer was chosen for its ability to
minimise the impact of signal variance on the steered
response of the microphone array, which therefore produces more accurate predictions of DoA15 . The MVDR
beamformer is computed by steering the response of the
microphone array in the spherical harmonic domain, by
spatially ﬁltering the response with a weighted spherical harmonics vector. The spherical harmonics vector is
weighted to ideally reduce the impact of unwanted noise
on the DoA estimation, and is computed from the timeframe’s covariance matrix as16 ,
w(Ψ) =

RH (t − τω )−1 y(Ψ)
y(Ψ)T RH (t − τω )−1 y(Ψ)

(6)

where (.)−1 denotes matrix inversion, y(Ψ) is the [16 ×
1] spherical harmonic vector computed using the getSH
function in the Spherical Harmonic Transform Library 13 ,
and RH (t−τω ) is the [16×16] covariance matrix for timeframe τω in RIR H(t) computed as14 ,
RH (t − τω ) = H(t − τω )T H(t − τω ) +

4

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

I(N +1)2
4π

(7)

FIG. 1. Top: A typical time-frame for a room impulse
response containing two simultaneously arriving reﬂections,
where each line represents a diﬀerent channel in the thirdorder spherical harmonic signal. Bottom: The directional
spectrum computed for the time-frame, where the darker regions indicate the arrival of strong directional components in
the signal.

where I(N +1)2 is the [(N +1)2 ×(N +1)2 ] identity matrix.
The MVDR beamformer output is then computed as,
Λ(Ψ) = w(Ψ)T RH (t − τω )w(Ψ)

(8)

where Λ(Ψ) is the intensity of the signal in the direction
Ψ calculated by steering the arrays response with the
[16 × 1] weighted spherical harmonics vector w(Ψ).
The directional spectrum for each time-frame is then
computed as the directional intensity of the signal steered
across a grid of azimuth and elevation positions from 0◦ ≤
θ ≤ 359◦ and 0◦ ≤ φ ≤ 180◦ in one degree increments.
An example of this directional spectrum can be seen in
Figure 1.
The next step is to detect the darker regions within
the directional spectrum, which represent the arrival of
directional signals in the time-frame. When considering
the nature of the data being analysed as seen in Figure 1, it is evident that two steps are required, separating
out spatial regions that overlap and detecting the directional regions in the spectrum. These steps can be easily
achieved through use of existing image processing techniques with small modiﬁcations to the intensity matrix.
The matrix Λ is ﬁrst converted into a grayscale image - with the darker regions being deﬁned as the points
of higher intensity using −Λ. The grayscale image is
mapped such that the values in −Λ that are less than or
equal to min(−Λ) ∗ 0.5 are set to 0 (black), and values
greater than or equal to max(−Λ) are set to 1 (white).
This compresses the dynamic range of the directional
spectrum ensuring that only the main discrete reﬂections
in the time-frame are detected.
To allow reﬂections with overlapping spatial regions
to be detected as individual events, image processing and
segmentation algorithms from MATLAB’s Image Processing Toolbox are used to separate overlapping regions
in the directional spectrum. Firstly, a binary image is
computed for the grayscale image extracting the darkest
Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

FIG. 2. An example of the binary mask of the directional
spectrum (as seen in Figure 1) after having an extended minima mask applied. As can be seen the spatial region for the
two arriving reﬂections overlap.

FIG. 3. An example of the resulting directional regions after
being masked by the output of the watershed algorithm. The
overlapping regions as seen in Figure 2 are now separated by
a white line.

regions of the directional spectrum as the indexes with
a color value less than ǫmsk . To optimise the segmentation procedure, an extended-minima mask is applied
to the binary image producing more deﬁned regions, as
shown in Figure 2. This extended-minima mask is created from the distance transform (distanceTransform =
-bwdist(∼binaryImage) 22 ) of the binary image using the
imextendedmin function23 , and applied to the binary matrix using the imimposemin function24 . The watershed
function25 with default parameters is then used to create a label matrix containing positive valued integers for
each region, with the regions separated by zero valued
indices. This label matrix is applied to the binary image,
by setting the indexes in the matrix where the watershed
algorithm outputs a 0 to 0, as shown in Figure 3.
The dark regions in the masked directional spectrum are then detected using MATLAB’s regionprops
function26 , called as regionprops(watershedMaskedImage,
directionalSpectrum, ’all’). The convex hull for these detected regions, as shown in Figure 4, represent the arrival
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

of discrete reﬂections. When considering a 2D image of
an unwrapped sphere, the wrap around observed at azimuth angles at θ = 0◦ and θ = 359◦ is not represented.
Therefore, a directional signal occupying this spatial region will exist as two separate dark areas on the directional spectrum. To this extent, if two regions, with the
same elevation values, exist at θ = 0◦ and θ = 359◦ , the
regions are combined and considered to be the arrival of
a single reﬂection. Furthermore, it is important to note
that this approach will not be able to distinguish between
two reﬂections arriving from a similar DoA and ToA, and
will detect these as a single reﬂection.
As this is an overlapping iterative process, and each
reﬂection occupies a range of samples in the SRIR, the
same reﬂection can be present across multiple subsequent
time-frames. Therefore, each detection is either a reﬂection that was detected in the previous time-frame, or a
new reﬂection. To resolve this ambiguity, the spatial region for each detection within the current time-frame is
compared to any detections in the previous time-frame,
and if any spatial region in the current time-frame had
an overlap of at least 80% with any in the previous timeframe, they are considered to have been produced by the
same reﬂection. The value of 80% is chosen to try and
prevent individual reﬂections arriving from similar directions being detected as the same reﬂection. All reﬂections
are therefore considered unresolved until their spatial region is no longer present in a subsequent time frame,
a time-frame is skipped, or the iterative process ends.
Once a detected reﬂection has been resolved using this
process, the spatial and temporal region for the reﬂection
is known and can be used to estimate the ToA and DoA.
The DoA can be estimated from the spatial region
within each time-frame for which a reﬂection is present.
The DoA is computed by adding the directional spectrum across the reﬂection’s time-frames, and taking the
steered direction, within the reﬂection’s spatial region,
with the largest intensity as corresponding to the DoA of
the reﬂection:
ΨDoA = arg max
Ψ

X
i=I
i=1

Λi (Ψr )



(9)

where Λi is the directional spectrum matrix for the ith
time-frame that the reﬂection is present, r deﬁnes the
sub-array indices in Ψ that deﬁne the spatial region, I is
the total number of time-frames over which the reﬂection
is present, and arg max(...) outputs the steered direction
with highest intensity value.
The ToA for the reﬂection is then deﬁned as the time
index containing the maximum peak present in the timeframe of the RIR, starting at the ﬁrst window that the
reﬂection is present, and ending at the start of the subsequent window where the reﬂection is no longer present.
To distinguish between multiple reﬂections in a single
time-frame, the response of the microphone is steered in

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

5

FIG. 4. An example of the detected regions (black contours)
within the directional spectrum of Figure 1.

the direction of the DoA of the arriving reﬂection through
spatial ﬁltering with the spherical harmonic transform as,
T oA = arg max(|y(ΨDoA )HT (t − τr )|)

(10)

τ

where T oA is the time of arrival for the given reﬂection,
τr is the time-frame that the reﬂection occupies in the
SRIR, ΨDoA contains the azimuth and elevation DoA
for the reﬂection, arg max(...) returns the index where
the maximum value of the expression is, and |...| denotes
absolute value.
B. The Acoustic Reﬂection Cartographer Method

Once the discrete reﬂections present in the SRIRs
have been detected, the geometry of the room can be
inferred. The proposed geometry inference method, The
Acoustic Reﬂection Cartographer (E-ARC), has two processing stages: image-source reversion and geometry validation.
Before any processing is done, the detected reﬂections across all SRIRs are combined into one structure,
and organised in descending ToA.
1. Image-source Reversion
For each candidate detection an estimated ToA and
DoA value will be extracted from the SRIR. Assuming
that the ﬁrst arrival at the microphone array belongs to
the direct sound and all subsequent detections are reﬂections, the source location (if not known a priori ) and
image-source locations can be deﬁned using directional
cosines, from27 as,


sin(φi ) cos(θi )


e
(11)
si = m + di  sin(φi ) sin(θi ) 
cos(φi )
where m is the [x, y, z] coordinate for the receiver and di
is the distance travelled by the ith detection, computed
as ToA ∗ c, where c is the speed of sound. To deﬁne the
parameters for the candidate boundaries (4), the most-

6

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

likely previous source for each image-source needs to be
found, and substituted for s in (4).
For notation purposes in this section e
si will be used
to refer the current image-source being tested, e
sk is a
candidate previous-source inferred from the kth reﬂection
which has a ToA less than the reﬂection that produced
e
si , and e
sj is the already detected previous-source for the
candidate previous-source e
sk .
When searching for the most-likely previous-sources
it is important to consider that each image-source is either produced by a ﬁrst-order reﬂection from a new or
existing boundary, a higher-order reﬂection from an existing boundary, or a false-positive detection. Following
the deﬁnition of the SRIR in Section III, it can be assumed that at least the ﬁrst two detections after the
direct sound from each SRIR, that are a consequence
boundary more than 50 cm away from the source and
receiver, are ﬁrst-order. Furthermore, it is assumed that
the ﬁrst detection that can produce either the ﬂoor or
ceiling for each source/receiver pair is ﬁrst-order, and
that the mean boundary position for these is assumed
to be the ﬂoor and ceiling location. For subsequent reﬂections the assumption of ﬁrst-order does not hold, as
the ﬁrst arriving second-order reﬂection will likely arrive before the last ﬁrst-order2 . Therefore, for subsequent reﬂections the most likely previous-source needs to
be found, which will either be the source location or an
image-source produced by a reﬂection with a ToA less
than the reﬂection that produced the image-source being
analysed. This search is constrained based on the aforementioned assumptions, which ideally will eliminate the
majority of false-positive detections made by the reﬂection detection method.
The ﬁrst consideration in the process is to ascertain
whether the image-source is as a result of a reﬂection
from a known boundary. This is tested for the source
and all image-sources (e
sk ) that are deﬁned by reﬂections
with a ToA less than that of the reﬂection that produced
e
si as,
e l −e
previousSource = e
sk , if ||(e
sk +2 hb
sk , n̂l in̂l )−e
si || ≤ ǫes
(12)
where e
sk is the image-source for the kth reﬂection, l =
1 : L is the number of inferred boundaries deﬁned by
ﬁrst-order reﬂections, h., .i denotes dot product, and ǫes is
an empirically deﬁned threshold value chosen to allow for
inaccuracies in ToA and DoA estimation. If any of these
image-sources tested produce an image-source location
close to the actual image-source (e
si ) it is assumed to be
the most-likely previous-source.
If no existing boundaries deﬁned by a ﬁrst-order reﬂection are attributable to e
si , then a new boundary is
deﬁned. As with the previous work in the literature1,2,5
an image-source that cannot be deﬁned using existing
boundaries is assumed to be ﬁrst-order. However, contrary to these works a set of constraints are imposed to
remove image-sources that are as a result of false-positive
detections, these constraints are (Figure 5),

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

• The diﬀerence in propagation distance ∆l between
the image-source-to-receiver path and source-toboundary-to-receiver path should be within a deﬁned threshold such that ∆l ≤ ǫl , where ǫl is the
threshold
• The inferred boundary is perpendicular to the ﬂoor
and ceiling, deﬁned using the z-axis coeﬃcient for
e z , which should be n
e z = 0,
the boundary’s normal n
e z ≤ ǫne , where ǫne is the threshold
constrained as n
value.
• The inferred boundary is at least 50 cm away from
the source and receiver, as deﬁned by the minimum
source-to-boundary and receiver-to-boundary distances.
• The specular reﬂection produced by the path from
source-to-boundary should have x and y directional
cosines close to that of the actual reﬂection path
from image-source-to-receiver, such that ∆∠ ≤ ǫ∠
where ǫ∠ is the threshold value used and ∆∠ is cale − [α, β]|| and α
culated as ||[e
α, β]
e, βe are calculated,
27
using ray-tracing , as,
α
e=α
eprev − 2cos(υ)µ
βe = βeprev − 2cos(υ)η

(13)
(14)

where α
e and βe are the directional cosines along
the x and y axes respectively, αprev and βprev are
the directional cosines computed for a line going
from the previous-source to the point where the line
from image-source-to-receiver intersects the boundary br , υ is the angle of incidence, and µ and η are
the directional cosines of the normal vector of the
plane along the x and y axes.
The implication of the assumption of ﬁrst-order is that
any higher-order reﬂections deﬁned as a ﬁrst-order reﬂection will produce a boundary distant from the desired
boundary location, and therefore, a geometry validation
process is required to reﬁne the inferred boundaries. Furthermore, second-order reﬂections that are produced by
interactions between perpendicular boundaries will produce an angled boundary that will impact the inferred
shape of the room. Therefore, attempts are made to ﬁnd
the correct previous-source for image-sources produced
by these perpendicular reﬂections.
Reﬂections produced by interactions between perpendicular boundaries are searched for by exploiting
the properties of the image-source method. Given that
an image-source is generated by mirroring its previoussource perpendicularly across a boundary, for the case of
a reﬂection between perpendicular boundaries, the relationship between the image-source, previous-source, and
the previous-source of the previous-source, can be expressed as a rotation of these image-sources around a
point in space (Figure 6). From this relationship, this
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

FIG. 5. Example of the relationship between the previoussource e
sk , image-source e
si , and a reﬂective boundary. The
dotted line denotes the reﬂection path computed for a specular reﬂection using (13) and the red dashed line is the path
from image-source to receiver m (color online).

point of rotation must be equidistant from these three
image-source locations in the reﬂection path. Therefore
from (4) this point of rotation pr can be expressed as,
sei + sej
(15)
2
where sei is the image-source being analysed and sej is
the previous-source of the previous-source. The imagesource produced for a reﬂection between perpendicular
boundaries can therefore be detected if the image-source
and previous-source are equidistant from this point of
rotation as,
pr =

previousSoure = e
sk , if | ||sei −pr ||−||sek −pr || | ≤ ǫo (16)

If more than one previous-source can be deﬁned using this relationship then the previous-source with the
smallest error in reﬂection path is used as,
ez )
min(∆l + ∆∠ + n

(17)

In the case that none of these steps produce a valid
candidate previous-source, the image-source in question
is assumed to be as a result of a false-positive detection
made by the reﬂection detection method. An overview
of this process can be seen in Algorithm 1.
2. Geometry Validation
From Figure 7 (a), it can be seen that there are three
types of potentially erroneous boundary detections. (I)
Boundaries positioned on the corners of the desired geometry as a result of a correct previous-source not being
detected for a second-order reﬂection between perpendicular boundaries. (II) Boundaries positioned immediately
after another boundary, which are likely to be a product
of either noise, or a single reﬂection being detected as
multiple separate arrivals. (III) Boundaries positioned

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

7

Generate image-sources
for i = number of reﬂection : -1 : 1 do
if e
si is within 1 meter of source or receiver
then
remove e
si as it cannot produce a valid
boundary
continue
end
if number of detections < 2 then
if norm(((e
si + s)/2) - s) > 0.5 and
norm(((e
si + s)/2) - m) > 0.5 then
previousSourcei = s
number of detections = number of
detections + 1
continue
end
end
for l = 1 : L do
for k = i + 1 : number of reﬂections do
if norm((e
sk + 2 * dot(bel - e
sk , nel -e
si )
< ǫs then
previousSourcei = sek
number of detections = number of
detections + 1
continue
end
end
end
Deﬁne new boundary using source as
previous-source
if ∆l < ǫl and ∆∠ < ǫ∠ and ∆e
n < ǫne then
possiblePreviousSource = s;
if bounday is the ﬁrst that can deﬁne the
ﬂoor or ceiling then
previousSourcei = s
number of detections = number of
detections + 1
continue
end
end
store = 1
for k = i + 1 : number of reﬂections do
if sek and (sei have a diﬀerence in distance
≤ ǫo to pr then
possiblePreviousSource(store, :) = sek
store = store + 1
end
end
if length(possiblePreviousSource) == 0
then
remove sei
continue
end
if length(possiblePreviousSource) > 1 then
ez )
[ , minIndex] = min(∆l + ∆∠ + n
previousSource(ii,:) =
possiblePreviousSource(minIndex, :)
number of detections = number of
detections + 1
else
previousSourcei =
possiblePreviousSource
number of detections = number of
detections + 1
end
end
end
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for image-source
reversion process considering a single source and
receiver.
8

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

FIG. 6.
Diagram showing the rotational relationship between the image-source and its previous source, in this case
Image-Source2 with Image-Source1 and Image-Source3 with
Image-Source2 (color online). Image-Source1 is produced by
mirroring the source in the boundary on the right side of
the square. Image-Source2 is produced by mirroring ImageSource1 in the lower boundary, and Image-Source3 is produced by mirroring Image-Source2 in the left boundary. Point
of Rotation 1 is the mid-point between Image-Source2 and the
Source location, and Point of Rotation 2 is the mid-point between Image-Source3 and Image-Source1.

far outside of the desired geometry, which are as a result
of higher-order reﬂections being deﬁned as ﬁrst-order.
The latter two of these potentially erroneous boundary
conditions will be considered here, as they will have the
largest impact on the accuracy of the geometry inference
process.
Ahead of the next step, boundaries that are coincident are removed until only one remains, reducing the
number of boundaries to be tested. Two boundaries are
e1
deﬁned as being coincident if the boundary normals n
e 2 are parallel and the inferred point on the boundand n
e 1 and b
e 2 , where 1 and 2 denote diﬀerent boundaries b
aries, exists on both boundaries35 , such that,
e 2 || ≤ ǫpar
||e
n1 × n
e
e
e 1 , b1 − b2 > | ≤ ǫpoint
and | < n

(18)
(19)

where ǫpar and ǫpoint are empirically deﬁned threshold
values to account for small variations in boundary position as a result of ToA and DoA errors. An additional
constraint is required to account for non-convex-shaped
rooms, where boundaries that are mathematically coincident could deﬁne two separate boundaries. To then
remove the aforementioned inferred boundaries that are
positioned outside of the desired geometry of the room,
a three step geometry validation process is proposed.
These three steps are as follows, reﬂection path validation, line-of-sight boundary validation, and closed
geometry validation (Algorithm 2). Each of these
steps are performed on an approximate estimation of the
inferred room’s geometry, based on the nearest intersection points35 between non-parallel inferred boundaries.

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

receiver position. Any boundaries that are not in line-ofsight of the receiver could not have produced a reﬂection
that arrives at the receiver. To test line-of-sight, a set
of rays are deﬁned with 0 ≤ θ ≤ 359 and φ = 90 using
(11), with an arbitrary value for di . The ﬁrst boundary
that intersects36 with each of these rays is considered
valid. An example of the resulting inferred boundaries
after this step has been performed can be seen in Figure 7 (c), where the remaining additional boundary from
Figure 7 (b) has been removed.
Step 3: Closed Geometry Test

FIG. 7. Example showing the remaining inferred boundaries
after each step of the geometry validation process. Figure
(a) shows the unconstrained boundaries before any processing
is performed, Figure (b) shows the remaining unconstrained
boundaries after the Reﬂection Path Validation step, Figure
(c) shows the remaining boundaries after the line-of-sight test,
and Figure (d) shows the remaining unconstrained boundaries
after the closed geometry test (color online).

Step 1: Reﬂection Path Validation
The ﬁrst step is to check if the reﬂection path from
the image-source-to-receiver is obstructed by additional
boundaries that are closer to the receiver than the boundary inferred by this image-source. This step will remove
the majority of boundaries positioned outside of the desired room’s geometry, as the reﬂection path for these
boundaries will be occluded by the candidate boundaries
that deﬁne the geometry of the room, as seen in Figure 7
(a). This step is performed by deﬁning a line from the
image-source that produced the boundary being tested to
the receiver, and computing the intersection36 between
the line and every other boundary. If any other boundary occlude the reﬂection path from the ith boundary
to the receiver, the ith boundary is removed. Once all
boundaries have been tested, the shape of the room is inferred from the remaining boundaries and the process is
repeated until no further boundaries are removed. An example of the resulting inferred geometry after this step
can be seen in Figure 7 (b), where only one external
boundary has not been removed.
Step 2: Line-of-Sight Boundary Validation
While the majority of incorrect boundaries have now
been removed, there are still non-valid boundaries that
exist as a result of the path from image-source to receiver
not passing through the boundary the image-source produces. Therefore, a line-of-sight test is performed to ensure all inferred boundaries are visible to at least one

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

These ﬁrst two steps will have reﬁned candidate
boundaries to that of the desired room for the majority of cases. The ﬁnal step is to ensure that the inferred
geometry of the room produces a closed shape. As with
the previous two stages the geometry of the room is ﬁrst
inferred, then any constrained boundaries that do not intersect with two adjacent boundaries, one on each side,
are removed. An example of the resulting inferred boundaries after this step has been performed can be seen in
Figure 7 (d), in this case the inferred room had produced
a closed geometry.
IV. TESTING

To test the proposed method, three scenarios are presented.
Scenario One consists of three sets of simulations, one for a convex Cuboid-Shaped room, a convex
Octagonal-Shaped Room, a non-convex L-Shaped Room,
and a non-convex T-Shaped Room. The Cuboid, Octagonal, and L-shaped room consist of two measurement
positions, and the T-Shaped room three, simulated using CATT-Acoustic28 . The SRIRs were simulated using
omnidirectional sources at three diﬀerent locations. The
simulations were run with 10,000,000 rays ensuring sufﬁcient excitation of the entire room, with diﬀuse reﬂections turned oﬀ. The boundaries are deﬁned as having
the absorption properties of a wooden surface, using the
WOOD30 material in CATT-Acoustic28 . The resulting
SRIRs are rendered out as third-order spherical harmonic
domain signals. The geometry and source and receiver
positions can be seen in Figure 8.
Scenario Two consists of two L-shaped rooms,
with volumes 320 m3 and 360 m3 , simulated in CATTAcoustic using the same parameters as the L-Shaped
room in Scenario One. These rooms are simulated using a single receiver positioned in line-of-sight of every
boundary, and 15 randomly selected source positions in
each segment of the room. From these two sets of 15
source positions for each L-shaped room, a selection of
33 source combinations that ensure a ﬁrst-order reﬂection from each boundary, are used to test the proposed
method. This example tests the variability of the performance of the method, quantifying any diﬀerence in
estimation accuracy between the two rooms.
Scenario Three consists of two RIR measurements captured using the EigenMike EM32, a 32-channel

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

9

while changesMade ∼= 0 do
Infer geometry using boundary-boundary
intersections.
changeHappened = 0
Step 1: Check reﬂection path for
multiple boundary intersections
for i = 1 : numberOfBoundaries do
for k = 1 : numberOfBoundaries do
if boundary k intersects line going
from point of incidence on boundary
i and the receiver then
remove boundary i
changeHappened = 1;
end
end
end
if changeHappened == 0 then
changesMade = 0
end
end
Step 2: line-of-sight test
for θ = 1 : 359 do
Deﬁne ray in azimuth direction θ
for i = 1 : numberOfBoundaries do
if ray intersects boundary i then
boundaryIsValid(i ) = 1
end
end
Remove boundaries where boundaryIsValid
== 0
end
Infer geometry using boundary-boundary
intersections.
Step 3: Closed Geometry test
for ii = 1 : numberOfBoundaries do
Compute the distance between boundary ii
and adjacent boundaries
if boundaries do not connect and distance
between boundaries is < 0.1 then
remove boundary ii
end
end
Infer geometry using boundary-boundary
intersection points.
Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for Geometric Validation
process
spherical microphone array, and a Genelec 8030 loudspeaker. The sound source used to capture the response
of the room was an exponential sine-sweep30 20 seconds
in length with a frequency range of 100-20 kHz, using the inverse-ﬁlter of the original sine-sweep to produce the SRIR. To better approximate an omnidirectional source, an average of the RIRs measured at four
speaker orientations (0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ ) is taken31 .
The ﬁnal SRIRs are then normalised to have a maximum sample value of ±1, and converted to third-order
spherical harmonic domain signals using MH Acoustics’
EigenStudio32 . The measurement room is cuboid-shaped
with dimensions 10.35 m×13.29 m×4.19 m, and has a
number of non-removable, adjustable, ﬂoor length curtains. As it was not possible to remove these curtains,
they were positioned, as much as is possible, to limit
their impact on the obtained SRIRs. Hence they were
arranged in corners of the room, across windows, and,
where possible, to cover features on the walls such as

10

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

electrical outputs, as well as the computer and interface
used for the measurements. While it is accepted that
this is non-ideal, and could have some impact on the results, every eﬀort has been made to minimize their potential inﬂuence on the measurements obtained, and ensure
that the main reﬂective boundaries are exposed and clear
from other possibly confounding features. Furthermore,
the ceiling was covered in large metal piping connected
to extractor fans and a layer of metal railing approximately 1 m from the ceiling. The noise ﬂoor in the room
is measured as 60.2 dBA and the room’s temperature
was 24.4◦ C, and hence the speed of sound is estimated
as 346.97 m/s. The room’s geometry, loudspeaker and
receiver positions, and an image of the room can be seen
in Figure 9.
The total measurements needed in these scenarios
are deﬁned by the number needed to ensure ﬁrst-order reﬂections for each boundary are captured. In practice any
number of SRIRs can be used. The SRIRs being analysed
are truncated to 3000 and 2000 samples in length for
the measured and simulated examples respectively. The
truncation lengths are chosen to allow suﬃcient time for
the main reﬂections to arrive while reducing the number
of higher-order reﬂections.
Three error metrics are used to analyse the accuracy of the inferred boundaries. (I) ∆Position - the
distance between desired and inferred boundaries1,2,7,10
measured at 10 cm intervals along the length of the target boundary and the RMS error computed over these
intervals. (II) Dihedral Angle7,8,10 - the angle between
desired and inferred boundaries. Dihedral angle is averaged over inferred boundaries if more than one exists.
(III) ∆Length2 - diﬀerence between desired and inferred
boundary length.
The threshold values used were derived empirically
through examination of results obtained for diﬀerent
cases, and chosen so all ﬁrst-order reﬂections are detected, while reducing the number of inaccurately inferred boundaries due to noise: ǫa = 0.01, ǫd = 30%,
ǫmsk = 0.1, ǫes = 30 cm, ǫpar , 0.1, ǫpoint = 0.1, and
ǫO = 15 cm.
The SRIRs used in testing are shifted in time to ensure that the ToA of the direct sound matches that expected given the source-receiver distances and speed of
sound, removing latency introduced by the measurement
system. Furthermore, the DoA is shifted to ensure that
θ = 0◦ is aligned with the positive going x axis.
V. RESULTS
A. Scenario One

When analysing simulated SRIRs, further consideration of the signal properties, and therefore choice of
beamformer is required. When simulating SRIRs the arriving reﬂections are highly correlated as a result of each
reﬂection being treated as a perfect Dirac, which in realworld measurement conditions is not the case. Therefore,
if there are multiple reﬂections, the directional spectrum

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

FIG. 8. Inferred geometry (dashed line) and desired geometry (solid line) for Scenario One Cuboid-Shaped Room (a),
Octagonal-Shaped Room (b), L-Shaped Room (c), and TShaped Room (d) (color online).

FIG. 9. Desired geometry (solid line), best case inferred geometry (red dashed line), and worst case inferred geometry
(blue dotted line) for Scenario Two L-Shaped Room One (a)
and Scenario Two L-Shaped Room Two (b) (color online).

B. Scenario Two

Room
Cuboid
Octagonal
L-Shaped
T-Shaped

∆Position
4.63 cm
2.69 cm
4.69 cm
16.45 cm

Dihedral Angle
8.59◦
2.01◦
14.02◦
8.03◦

∆Length
6.32 cm
9.01 cm
25.92 cm
42.45 cm

TABLE I. Results for Scenario One - simulated data for the
Cuboid, Octagonal, L-shaped, and T-shaped rooms: presenting the RMS diﬀerence in position (∆Position), dihedral angle, and diﬀerence in boundary length (∆length).

produced by the MVDR beamformer will have a lower
range between the directional response of the reﬂections
and the directional response of the residual signal, as the
signals covariance matrix is rank-deﬁcient33 . This reduction in range can lead to ﬁrst-order reﬂections being
missed. Therefore, when analysing the simulated impulse
responses the plane wave decomposition14,34 beamformer
is used instead.
The results in Table I and Figure 8 show that for
the Cuboid, Octagonal-, and L-Shaped Room, the shape
of the room has been inferred, with RMS ∆ Positions of
4.63 cm, 2.69 cm, and 4.69 cm respectively. However, the
boundaries of the T-Shaped room are angled, resulting
in an increase in RMS boundary position errors. For the
Cuboid- and L-Shaped room the large dihedral angles
are a result of boundaries being inferred in the corners
of the room due to incorrectly assigned previous-sources
for second-order reﬂections. However, the dihedral angles
for Octagonal- and T-Shaped rooms are attributable to
inferred boundaries being slightly angled, as a result of
ToA and/or DoA estimation errors for the reﬂections.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

The results in Table II are presented as average
boundary errors across the test cases. To perform statistical analysis of the data the non-parametric KruskalWallis test, kruskalwallis 38 , is used, and reported as (χ2
= , p = , degrees of freedom = ). Furthermore, the bootstrap process37 is used to compute the 95% conﬁdence
interval for the mean values using bootstrapci 39 .
There is a 7.41 cm diﬀerence between the mean
boundary positional error across the two L-shaped rooms,
with the second, larger, L-Shaped room having larger
boundary positional errors. This increase in boundary
position error is a consequence of 11 cases for the second L-shaped room having an additional angled boundary being inferred, compared to ﬁve for the ﬁrst. The
minimum and maximum mean error for the measurement sets in L-shaped Room One are ∆Position =
[3.95 cm, 35.58 cm], Dihedral Angle = [2.24◦ , 11.22◦ ],
and ∆Length = [6.48 cm, 110.98 cm], and for the second
L-Shaped Room, ∆Position = [4.22 cm, 32.81 cm], Dihedral Angle = [1.05◦ , 10.30◦ ], and ∆Length = [8.40 cm,
85.95 cm]. Comparing the variation in measurement accuracy between the two L-shaped rooms shows no significant diﬀerence for the ∆Position (χ2 = 0.0005, p = 0.98,
degrees of freedom = 395) and ∆Length (χ2 = 0.35, p
= 0.55, degrees of freedom = 395). However, there is a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence for the dihedral angle (χ2 = 10.25,
p = 0.0014, degrees of freedom = 395), as a result of the
additional boundaries inferred in the corners of the room
for L-Shaped Room One. This suggests that while there
are diﬀerences in the mean values between these two examples, the variability in performance between the two
sets are comparable. The best and worse cases for each
L-Shaped room can be seen in Figure 9.

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

11

Room
∆Position
Dihedral Angle
∆Length
One 11.50±0.1 cm 7.28◦ ±0.048◦ 36.84±0.31 cm
Two 18.91±0.17 cm 3.69◦ ±0.027◦ 5.63±0.36 cm
TABLE II. Average error metrics, diﬀerence in position
(∆Position), dihedral angle, and diﬀerence in boundary
length (∆length), for Scenario Two L-Shaped Rooms One and
Two.

VI. DISCUSSION

The results presented show comparable RMS boundary position estimation error to those in1,5,8,10 , which
reported error values between 0.063 cm to 29.38 cm
when considering only cuboid-shaped rooms. The results
showed that the T-Shaped Room had the largest estimation error, as a result of the inferred boundaries being
angled. This could be as a result of the room’s complexity, or the requirement for more measurement positions,
which increases the chance of erroneous boundaries being estimated. Results presented in Scenario Two showed
that the proposed method displayed statistically similar
performance across two set of 33 measurements for two
L-Shaped rooms.
VII. CONCLUSIONS

FIG. 10. Figure (a): Inferred geometry (dashed line) and
desired geometry (solid line) for Scenario Two (color online).
Figure (b): image of room setup.

C. Scenario Three

As can be seen in Figure 10 and the results in Table III, the general shape of the room has been inferred
with small dihedral angle values between the original and
inferred boundaries. However, there are some inaccuracies in the boundary positions, and therefore the lengths
of surrounding boundaries. These inaccuracies are likely
due to either imperfect specular reﬂections, under or over
estimation of the ToA for reﬂections in the measured impulse responses, or any inaccuracy in the estimated DoA
of the reﬂections. These lead to incorrect estimation of
the image-sources desired position, which aﬀects both
the positioning of the boundary it infers, and subsequent
boundaries that are deﬁned using this image-source.
Boundary
1
2
3
4
Floor
Ceiling
RMS

∆Position
16.16 cm
4.02 cm
25.46 cm
13 cm
14.5 cm
10.60 cm
15.37 cm

Dihedral Angle
0.54◦
2.28◦
0◦
0.60◦
N/A
N/A
1.21◦

∆Length
18.45 cm
34.63 cm
1.4 cm
24.05 cm
N/A
N/A
23.02 cm

This paper has presented a new method reﬂection
detection and geometry inference, without needing large
numbers of measurement locations or an assumption of
convexity of the measured room. This is achieved by
exploiting directional information contained within spatial room impulse responses measured using a spherical
microphone array. The method is tested using simulated SRIRs for two convex- and four non-convex-shaped
rooms, and real-world measurements in a cuboid room.
The results showed that the inferred room’s geometry
is close to that of the desired, with generally low RMS
boundary distance errors and errors in dihedral angle
generally as a result of angled boundaries in the corners of the room. The RMS boundary position errors
are comparable to prior work1,5,8,10 with a maximum difference in RMS error of 16.38 cm, using at most three
measurement positions, compared to 6-64 used in this
prior work. In addition to this, results presented in Scenario Two showed that the variance in performance of the
proposed method is statistically similar across the two
cases presented. Further investigation into non-convex
geometry inference could explore alternative means of
retracting higher-order reﬂection paths to improve robustness, and should consider real-world measurements
of non-convex shaped rooms. Furthermore, subspacebeamformers could be explored to try and improve the
robustness of the reﬂection detection process to interfering noise.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Funding was provided by a UK Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Doctoral
Training Award.
1 L. Remaggi, P. J. B. Jackson, P. Coleman, and W. Wang, “Acous-

TABLE III. Results for Scenario Three, real-world measurements, presenting the diﬀerence in position (∆Position), dihedral angle, and diﬀerence in boundary length (∆length)

tic Reﬂector Localization : Novel Image Source Reversion and
Direct Localization Methods,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing 25(2), 296–309 (2017) doi:
10.1109/TASLP.2016.2633802.
2 I. Dokmanic, R. Parhizkar, A. Walther, Y. M. Lu, and M. Vet-

terli, “Acoustic echoes reveal room shape,” in Proceedings of the

12

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

National Academy of Sciences (2013), Vol. 110, pp. 12186–12191,
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1221464110.
3 D. Arteaga, D. Gracia-Garzon, T. Mateos, and J. Usher, “Scene
inference from audio,” in AES Convention 134, Rome, Italy
(2013), http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=16794.
4 F. Ribeiro, D. Florêncio, D. Ba, and C. Zhang, “Geometrically
constrained room modeling with compact microphone arrays,”
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing
20(5), 1449–1460 (2012) doi: 10.1109/TASL.2011.2180897.
5 S. Tervo and T. Tossavainen, “3D Room Geometry Estimation

from Measured Impulse Responses,” in Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2012 IEEE International Conference on, Kyoto, Japan (2012), pp. 513–516, doi: 10.1109/
ICASSP.2012.6287929.
6 M. Kuster, D. de Vries, E. M. Hulsebos, and A. Gisolf, “Acoustic
imaging in enclosed spaces: Analysis of room geometry modiﬁcations on the impulse response,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 116, 2126–2137 (2004) doi: 10.1121/1.1785591.
7 E. Nastasia, F. Antonacci, A. Sarti, and S. Tubaro, “Localiza-

tion of planar acoustic reﬂectors through emission of controlled
stimuli,” European Signal Processing Conference 156–160 (2011)
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7074175.
8 J. Filos, A. Canclini, F. Antonacci, A. Sarti, P. A. Naylor, and P. Milano, “Localization of Planar Acoustic Reﬂectors from the Combination of Linear Estimates,” 2012 Proceedings of the 20th European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO) (Eusipco), 1019–1023 (2012) https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/6334299.
9 L. Zamaninezhad, P. Annibale, and R. Rabenstein, “Localiza-

tion of environmental reﬂectors from a single measured transfer function,” ISCCSP 2014 - 2014 6th International Symposium
on Communications, Control and Signal Processing, Proceedings
157–160 (2014) doi: 10.1109/ISCCSP.2014.6877839.
10 Y. E. Baba, A. Walther, and E. A. Habets, “3D room geometry

inference based on room impulse response stacks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio Speech and Language Processing 26(5),
857–872 (2018) doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2017.2784298.
11 P. A. Naylor, A. Kounoudes, J. Gudnason, and M. Brookes, “Estimation of glottal closure instants in voiced speech using the
DYPSA algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and
Language Processing 15(1), 34–43 (2007) doi: 10.1109/TASL.
2006.876878.
12 D. P. Jarrett, E. A. Habets, and P. A. Naylor, Theory and Ap-

plications of Spherical Microphone Array Processing (Springer
International Publishing, 2017).
13 A. Politis,
“getSH,” https://github.com/polarch/SphericalHarmonic-Transform/blob/master/getSH.m (2015).
14 A. Politis, “Spherical Array Porcessing Toolbox,” (2016), https:
//github.com/polarch/Spherical-Array-Processing.
15 H.

Sun,“Localization of distinct reﬂections in rooms using
spherical microphone array eigenbeam processing,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 131(4), 2828–
2840 (2012) https://asa.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1121/1.
3688476?journalCode=jas.
16 D. P. Jarrett, E. A. Habets, and P. A. Naylor, “Spherical harmonic domain noise reduction using an MVDR beamformer and
DOA-based second-order statistics estimation,” ICASSP, IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings 654–658 (2013) doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2013.
6637729.
17 BSI Standard ISO 3382-1 and British Standards Institution,
“Acoustics - Measurements of room acoustic parameters Part 1:
Performance Spaces (ISO 3382-1:2009),” (2009).

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 7 October 2019

18 B. Rafaely, B. Weiss, and E. Bachmat, “Spatial aliasing in spher-

ical microphone arrays,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
55(3), 1003–1010 (2007) doi: 10.1109/TSP.2006.888896.
19 MH

Acoustics, “Eigenbeam Datasheet,” (2016), https://
mhacoustics.com/sites/default/files/EigenbeamDatasheet_
R01A.pdf.
20 N. Epain and C. T. Jin, “Spherical Harmonic Signal Covariance
and Sound Field Diﬀuseness,” 24(10), 1796–1807 (2016) doi: 10.
1109/TASLP.2016.2585862.
21 J. Capon, “High-resolution frequency-wavenumber spectrum
analysis,” Adaptive Antennas for Wireless Communications
57(8), 1408–1418 (1969) doi: 10.1109/PROC.1969.7278.
22 MathWorks, “bwdist,” (2017), https://uk.mathworks.com/
help/images/ref/bwdist.html.
23 MathWorks, “imextendedmin,” (2017), https://uk.mathworks.

com/help/images/ref/imextendedmin.html.
“imimposemin,” (2017), https://uk.mathworks.
com/help/images/ref/imimposemin.html.
25 MathWorks, “Watershed,” (2017), https://uk.mathworks.com/
help/images/ref/watershed.html.
26 MathWorks, “regionprops,” (2017), https://uk.mathworks.
com/help/images/ref/regionprops.html.
27 A. Krokstad, S. Strøm, and S. Sørsdal, “Calculating the Acoustical Room Response by The Use of Ray Tracing Technique,”
Journal of Sound and Vibration 8, 118–125 doi: 10.1016/
0022-460X(68)90198-3.
28 CATT, “CATT-Acoustic,” (2016), http://www.catt.se/.
29 MathWorks, “imclose,” (2018), https://www.mathworks.com/
help/images/ref/imclose.html.
24 MathWorks,

30 A. Farina, “Simultaneous measurement of impulse response and

distortion with a swept-sine technique,” Proc. AES 108th conv,
Paris, France (2000) http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?
elib=10211.
31 F. Stevens and D. Murphy, “Spatial impulse response measure-

ment in an urban environment,” in Presented at the 55th AES
International Conference, AES, Helsinki, Finland (2014), pp. 1–
8, http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=17355.
32 MH Acoustics, “EigenStudio,” (2013), https://mhacoustics.
com/products.
33 N.

Huleihel and B. Rafaely, “Spherical array processing for
acoustic analysis using room impulse responses and time-domain
smoothing,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
133(June 2013), 3995–4007 (2013) doi: 10.1121/1.4804314.
34 D. P. Jarrett, E. A. P. Habets, and P. A. Naylor, “3D Source
localization in the spherical harmonic domain using a pseudointensity vector,” in Signal Processing Conference, 2010 18th
European, 5, IEEE, Aalborg, Denmark (2010), pp. 442–446,
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7096575.
35 E. Weisstein, “Plane-Plane Intersection,” http://mathworld.
wolfram.com/Plane-PlaneIntersection.html.
36 E. Weisstein, “Line-Plane Intersection,” http://mathworld.
wolfram.com/Line-PlaneIntersection.html.
37 B. Efron, “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife,”

The Annals of Statistics 7(1) (1979) https://projecteuclid.
org/euclid.aos/1176344552.
38 MathWorks, “kurkalwallis,” (2006), https://uk.mathworks.
com/help/stats/kruskalwallis.html.
39 MathWorks, “bootstrapci,” (2006), https://uk.mathworks.com/
help/stats/bootci.html.

Lovedee-Turner et al.: 3D reﬂector localisation and geometry estimation

13

