QUIET DRONES
Second International e-Symposium
on
UAV/UAS Noise
27th to 30th June 2022
Acoustic measurement of multi-rotor drones in anechoic and hemianechoic chambers
Zhida Ma1, Han Wu1, Hanbo Jiang1, Siyang Zhong1,2, Xin Zhang*1,3.
1. Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
2. HKUST Institute for Advanced Study, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Hong Kong, China.
3. HKUST-Shenzhen Research Institute, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China.

Summary
The rapidly widening applications of drones can cause significant noise pollution issues. There
exist needs for drone noise measurements in controllable test facilities. In this paper, we present
the outcome of in-flight noise measurements of a quad-rotor drone in an anechoic chamber that
can be set up as either a full anechoic configuration or a hemi-anechoic configuration. Flight
conditions including hover, cruise, vertical climb and descent were tested. The noise was
measured by two linear microphone arrays with a total of 15 free-field microphones. The
instantaneous position of the drone was recorded by an optical motion capture system. For each
working condition of the drone flight, multiple tests were conducted to reduce the statistical errors
and uncertainties in the noise measurement. A criterion about the observer distance to ensure
the acoustic far-field condition is proposed and justified using the measurement results.
Moreover, by adjusting the drone's position and orientation, i.e., the heading angle, the noise
directivity patterns on a spherical surface are obtained, showing a discernible correlation with the
drone's airframe geometry and rotor configuration. The comparison between the full anechoic
and the hemi-anechoic configurations highlighted the need of using non-reflective facilities for
drone noise tests.

* aexzhang@ust.hk

1.

Introduction

The fast-evolving technologies in consumer electronics and information technology facilitate the
development and application of multi-rotor drones [1]. As a public health risk, the noise emission
of drones has drawn considerable attention from both the drone industry and the academic
community [2][3]. Noise assessment and certification for drones are increasingly being
discussed. Several experimental studies have investigated the noise characteristics of multi-rotor
drones. Tinney and Sirohi [4] conducted measurements of the multi-rotor drone noise at static
thrust in an anechoic chamber and obtained some understanding of the dependence of drone
noise on rotor size and operation speed. Outdoor field tests have been performed to investigate
the noise characteristics of multi-rotor drones in flight conditions [5][6], which, however, suffered
from limited accuracy and repeatability because of the wind gusts, ground reflections,
environmental noise and positioning errors [7]. The outdoor experiment by Heutschi et al. [8]
showed that for a drone in hover, the variation in the rotation speed of the rotors could reach up
to 500 revolutions per minute (RPM) at a windspeed of 4.2 m/s. To reduce the uncertainties in
the drone noise measurements, an acoustically qualified environment is necessary for drone
noise assessment. Zhou et al. [9] conducted the noise measurements of a flying quad-rotor drone
in a large anechoic chamber, providing comprehensive noise characteristics of the drone in real
flight conditions.
Anechoic facilities have the advantages of providing a controllable test condition, isolating
background noise, and realizing free-field conditions in all directions. However, a standardized
drone noise test protocol has not been established. In 2019, the European Commission [10]
issued a regulation on the requirements for the design and manufacture of the small unmanned
aerial system (sUAS), which specified a test code for the airborne noise of sUAS with a maximum
take-off mass (MTOM) below 25 kg. The acoustic measurement follows the ISO 3744:2010
standard and requires the sUAS to hover at 0.5 m above a reflecting plane in an anechoic
chamber. The noise metric is the A-weighted sound power level (𝐿𝑊𝐴 ). However, the test method
could suffer from several issues. At such a low hover height, the wake from the rotors of the
drone can directly impinge the reflecting surface, resulting in an aerodynamic ground effect [11].
The interaction between the rotors and the reflecting surface could affect the acoustic
characteristics. Also, the test code does not consider the noise directivity of the sUAS, which is
important because observers can perceive the noise of drones operating in a low-altitude urban
space from different directions. Moreover, requirements for the measurement distance to satisfy
the acoustic far-field condition, which is essential in characterizing the noise sources, are
missing.
This work aims at capturing the fundamental properties of noise radiated by multi-rotor drones
by measurements in an anechoic chamber. Comprehensive noise tests were conducted for a
representative quad-rotor drone under realistic flight conditions, including hover, vertical climb
and descent, and horizontal cruise. An advantage of the chamber is that it can be set up as either
a full anechoic configuration or a hemi-anechoic one, allowing us to assess the influence of
ground reflection on the noise measurement. The remaining part of this paper is arranged as
follows. In section 2, the test apparatus and methods are described. In section 3, the results and
analysis of the measurements are presented. Section 4 are the conclusions.

2.

Experimental setup and methods

2.1 Test apparatus
The experiments were conducted in the anechoic chamber of the Aerodynamic and Acoustic
Facility at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. The chamber has a wedge-towedge dimension of 8.1 m (L) × 6 m (W) × 5.1 m (H) and a cut-off frequency of 100 Hz in the full
anechoic configuration. With the bottom wedges removed, the chamber is in the hemi-anechoic
configuration and the height is 5.7 m. Figure 1 shows a schematic of test setup.
Page | 2

An off-the-shelf quad-rotor drone was tested in the experiment. The drone was equipped with
four fixed-pitch rotors with a diameter of 0.24 m. It has a diagonal axial distance of 0.35 m and a
gross mass of 1.4 kg. An optical motion capture system consisting of nine infrared cameras was
deployed to track the positions of the drone. The system provides real-time position data with a
resolution of 0.1 mm and a refresh rate of 50 Hz. The position data was recorded in
synchronization with the acoustic measurements. During the tests, the position of the drone was
remotely controlled by the operator outside the chamber and maintained by the visual sensing
module equipped by the drone, and the position drift is within 0.03 m.
Acoustic measurements were made using two linear microphone arrays consisting of fifteen ¼"
G.R.A.S. 46BE free-field microphones in total. The two arrays were aligned in a single vertical
plane. One with nine microphones was placed vertically near a corner of the chamber. The other
one containing the remaining six microphones was mounted horizontally 0.12 m above the
bottom wedges. The microphones were separated 0.5 m from the adjacent ones, and all of them
were equipped with windscreens to alleviate the measurement noise generated by airflow around
the microphone head. A National Instruments PXIe-4497 module with PXIe-1073 chassis was
used to record the acoustic data. The sampling rate was 50 kHz, and a record time of 20 s was
used for each test. The acquired acoustic data was processed by Welch's method [12] using a
Hann window with a 50% overlap and a frequency resolution of 5 Hz.

Figure 1: Schematic of test setup in the anechoic chamber.
2.2 Reference dimension
The determination of acoustic measurement distance should generally satisfy two requirements.
First, the distance should not be too far. Otherwise, the measured sound will be affected by
background noise, resulting in a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). However, this criterion is not a
problem in the current study because the background noise of the anechoic chambers is
sufficiently low. Second, the measurement distance should be larger than a critical value to
ensure the acoustic far-field condition. In this case, at a given observer angle, the sound level
Page | 3

will decrease inversely and follow the inverse square law. So far, the requirements for the drone
noise measurement have not been clearly established, especially for drone noise tests.
Here we propose a normalized reference dimension 𝐿 for the acoustic measurement of a multirotor drone:
(1)

𝐿 = 𝑑 + 𝐷,

where 𝑑 is the maximum diagonal axial distance between two rotors and 𝐷 is the maximum
diameter of the rotors. In this way, both the airframe dimension (gross weight dependent) and
rotor dimension (propulsive power dependent) are considered. From the perspective of
acoustics, the reference dimension 𝐿 denotes the minimum diameter of a sphere to completely
enclose the possible drone noise source regions. For the quad-rotor drone used in this
experiment, a reference dimension 𝐿 = 0.59 m. Then, based on our previous experience in
measuring the propeller noise, the far-field condition can often be satisfied by a measurement
distance larger than 10 times of the rotor radius. Therefore, in this work, we will examine if the
far-field condition is met when
(2)

𝑅 ≥ 5𝐿,
where 𝑅 is the distance between the observer (microphone) and the centre of the drone.
2.3 Hemi-anechoic and full anechoic configurations

Two groups of hover tests were conducted with the chamber in the hemi-anechoic and the full
anechoic configurations respectively. Only the data from the vertical microphone array were used
to compare the drone noise properties in the lateral directions. As shown in Figure 2, two different
reference ground planes were regarded as reflective and non-reflective surfaces and served as
the basis (𝑧 = 0) for height calculation, respectively. One more microphone was mounted to the
vertical array due to the extended height of the chamber with the bottom wedges removed.
(a)

(b)

mic #1

mic #1

0.5m

0.5m
4.5m

4.0m

5.7m

mic #9
0.8m

mic #10
0.8m

Reflective
surface

0.5m

5.0m

mic #15

Non-reflective
surface
0.7m

(a) for (a) hemi-anechoic configuration
(b) (b) full anechoic configuration.
Figure 2: Microphone setups

The top view of the positions of microphone arrays, hover points, and position tracking cameras,
as well as the definition of the ground coordinate system, are shown in Figure 3. Five hover points
denoted by a, b, c, d and e, separated by a horizontal interval of 𝐿, were tested to realize different
observer distances. The drone hovered above each hover point, heading +x direction, at a height
same as each microphone numbered #2 to #9 in the vertical array. Therefore, a planar grid
composed of 40 hover positions is generated for both full anechoic and hemi-anechoic
configurations, as shown in Table 1. The two groups of hover tests were each repeated five times.

Page | 4

1.2m
Vertical array
Horizontal array
Hover points
Cameras

1.2m

x
a

b
c
d

y

e

Figure 3: Positions of microphone arrays, hover points and cameras (top view).
Hover heights
4.8 m
4.3 m
3.8 m
3.3 m
2.8 m
2.3 m
1.8 m
1.3 m
0.8 m

Hemi-anechoic
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
×

Full anechoic
×
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

Table 1: Hover heights tested in the two groups of experiments. The cross sign (×) means the
corresponding measurements were not conducted due to space limitations.
2.4 Noise directivity tests
Since the microphone arrays are fixed while the drone is agile to manoeuvre inside the chamber,
the drone was controlled to hover at different heading angles to realize different azimuthal
observer angles. A schematic of the definition of the polar observer angle (𝜃) and azimuthal
observer angle (𝜑) is shown in Figure 4 (b). Three hover positions in the microphone plane were
determined to maximize the measurable polar observer angle as shown in Figure 4 (a). In this
case, only data from microphones #1 to #5 were used for the hover positions 2 and 3, detailed
coordinates and 𝜃 measurement ranges of these hover positions are specified in Table 2.
The drone was controlled to hover at each position and vary heading directions at an interval of
15°. Precise heading angle adjustment is realized by aligning the real-time image from the
onboard camera to the yellow ground reference markers (see Figure 1). The tests were repeated
four times, and the four rotors were swapped diagonally between each repeated test group to
minimize the influence of their manufacturing differences on the noise directivity measurement.

Page | 5

(b)

(a)
mic #1

body 𝑦
mic #4
mic #5

1

𝜑

𝜃

body 𝑥

2
3

mic #9

𝜃

z

body 𝑧

Figure 4: (a) Hover positions for directivity test (b) observer angle definition in body-fixed frame.
Hover position
1
2
3

𝑥 (m)
0.00
0.70
1.42

𝑦 (m)
0.00
1.00
2.08

𝑧 (m)
-3.30
-1.60
-1.20

𝜃 range (°)
[8.9,115.5]
[122.0,149.0]
[158.4,170.0]

Table 2: Coordinates and polar angle measurement range at each hover position.
2.5 Dynamic flight test
Vertical climb, descent and cruise flight tests were performed to study the noise characteristics
of the drone in dynamic flight conditions. The utilization of the space was maximized with the help
of the position tracking system. The cases of dynamic flight tests are illustrated in Table 3.
Flight condition
Vertical climb
Vertical descent
Cruise

Case index
C1
C2
D1
D2
F

Start position
𝑝start (m)

End position
𝑝end (m)

[0,0,-0.80]

[0,0,-0.43]

[0,0,-0.43]

[0,0,-0.80]

[-2.00, 2.90,-3.30]

[2.00,-2.90,-3.30]

Flight speed
𝑉 (m/s)
0.50
0.25
0.50
0.25
0.50

Table 3: Start, end positions and flight speeds of tested dynamic flight conditions.

3.

Results and discussions

The results are presented in five subsections. The first subsection shows the repeatability of both
position and acoustic data. The second subsection gives the comparison between hemi-anechoic
and full anechoic configurations, as well as the examination of the far-field criterion in Eq.(2). The
third subsection analyses the effect of ground reflection in the hemi-anechoic chamber setup on
noise measurements. The fourth subsection presents the reconstructed noise directivity map of
the drone in hover. The final subsection presents the results of selected cases from dynamic
flight tests described in Table 3.

Page | 6

3.1 Repeatability of test data
Although the real-time position data from the tracking system were not used to form an automatic
position control system for the time being, the drone's position maintaining capability provided by
its visual positioning system was satisfactory. Figure 5 shows the instantaneous position
deviations (from nominal values) in three directions of five repeated hover tests. The average
position drift, indicated by the maximum deviations, of all hover tests was 0.05 m (0.085𝐿)
horizontally and 0.026 m (0.044𝐿) vertically.

Figure 5: Position deviations from averaged values during five repeated hover tests.
Figure 6 shows the sound pressure level (SPL) spectra of the five repeated hover tests. The
spectrum of the background noise in the full anechoic experiment is also plotted. The data is from
microphone #4 as the drone hovered 3.3 m above point c (horizontal centre of the chamber). The
measured noise surpasses the background noise in the frequency range of interest (100~20000
Hz), the spectrum of each repeated test conforms well with others, and the blade passage
frequency (BPF) is at around 182 Hz.
182Hz

background

Figure 6: SPL spectra of five repeated tests and background noise.
Page | 7

3.2 Acoustic pressure decay with observer distance
Figure 7 shows the overall sound pressure level (OASPL) decay with respect to observer
distance (normalized by 𝐿) when the drone is hovering at different heights in both the full anechoic
and the hemi-anechoic configurations. The OASPL is integrated from 100 to 20000 Hz using the
data from the microphone at the same height as the drone. Each data point on a single curve,
representing the averaged values, corresponds to a hover point described in Figure 3. The error
bars indicate the max deviations in the five repeated tests. With the abscissa in logarithmic scale,
the gradient of the blue dashed line is a reference of spherical sound pressure decay (1/𝑅) based
on the inverse square law.
A larger discrepancy can be observed in the results from the hemi-anechoic configuration, as
shown in Figure 7 (a). The linearity of curves does not agree well with the spherical decay
reference, and the deviations can reach as large as 3 dB. Nevertheless, the error bars of the two
groups of results are at a comparable level (0.5 dB), which indicates the high repeatability of both
groups of measurements. Therefore, the discrepancy in the hemi-anechoic results is attributed
to the presence of the reflective surface.
For the measurements in the full anechoic configuration, the sound pressure decay agrees well
with the spherical decay within the measured distance range (3.4𝐿 ~ 7.4𝐿). In this case, it will be
reasonable to scale the acoustic data measured within this distance range to a uniform
measurement distance. Moreover, the results justified that the criterion specified in Eq. (2) is
sufficient to ensure far-field condition.

(a) hemi-anechoic

(b) full anechoic

Figure 7: OASPL decay with respect to measurement distance at different hover heights.
3.3 Effect of ground reflection
This subsection presents the detailed spectral analysis of the ground reflection to illustrate its
effect on the noise assessment of multi-rotor drones. Figure 8(a) shows the noise spectra from
two adjacent microphones in a hemi-anechoic measurement. A large discrepancy can be found
in the low to middle-frequency range. Since the two microphones' observer distance and
equivalent angle are close, the acoustic spectral results were expected to be similar. However,
in Figure 8 (b), little difference is found for the full anechoic measurement, while a significant
difference can be found in the hemi-anechoic test results. At the BPF, which is the dominant tonal
contribution, the difference in the measured SPL can be as significant as 10 dB. Therefore, it can
be concluded that the ground reflections can change the original spectral characteristics,
especially at low frequencies. The results illustrate the need to use a full anechoic facility to
measure the drone noise spectra.

Page | 8

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: (a) SPL spectra from mic #9 and #10 in a hemi-anechoic test (b) SPL spectral
difference between the two near-ground microphones in two chamber configurations.
3.4 Noise directivity in hover
Based on the test results, complete spherical directivity maps of the drone were reconstructed in
the body-fixed frame for different noise components, as shown in Figures Figure 9 and Figure
10. Linear interpolation and extrapolation were used to estimate the values at the observer angles
that were not covered by the measurements. The data were averaged from four groups of
repeated tests and scaled to a uniform observer distance of 3.2 m.
Figure 9 shows the directivity of broadband OASPL integrated from 100 to 20000 Hz. The
broadband noise generally exhibits a dipole pattern with the peak values in the axial direction of
the rotors. A maximum difference of 10 dB can be found between the noise radiated in different
directions. As for the tonal components shown in Figure 10, each tone presents significantly
different directivity patterns. These patterns exhibit either two or four lobes in the azimuthal
direction, possibly caused by rotor-rotor and rotor-airframe interactions.

Figure 9: Broadband OASPL directivity.
Page | 9

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 10: Tonal SPL directivity at (a) 1BPF (b) 2BPF (c) 3BPF.

Page | 10

With the spherical SPL data, the sound power level (PWL) of the drone in hover can be estimated.
The calculation follows the procedure specified in ISO 3745-2012 standard [13], the averaged
SPL at the measurement surface is expressed by:
𝜋

2𝜋
2
1
̅̅̅̅
𝐿𝑝f = 10 log10 [
∫ ∫ 100.1𝐿𝑝 (𝑟,𝜃,𝜑) 𝑟 2 sin 𝜃 𝑑𝜃𝑑𝜑] ,
4𝜋𝑟 0 −𝜋

(3)

2

where 𝑟 is the normalized measurement distance, and 𝐿𝑝 (𝑟, 𝜃, 𝜑) is the SPL at the corresponding
microphone location. Thus, the PWL at a reference sphere which has a 1 m2 surface area is
calculated by:
𝑆1
̅̅̅̅
𝐿𝑊 = 𝐿
𝑝f + 10 log10 (𝑆 ) dB + 𝐶1 + 𝐶2 ,

(4)

0

where 𝑆1 is the area of the test sphere (of radius 𝑟), 𝑆0 is 1 m2, 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 are two correction terms
regarding the barometric pressure during the measurements. The calculated PWL is 91.38 dB,
when A-weighting is applied, the A-weighted PWL is 90.52 dBA.
3.5 Dynamic flight conditions
As the drone’s position varied with time during dynamic flight tests, the short-time Fourier
transform (STFT) was applied to the acoustic data to perform time-frequency analysis. The STFT
calculation resulted in a frequency resolution of 5 Hz and a time resolution of 0.1 s. To analyze
the correlation between the drone’s motion and noise radiation, the position tracking data are
differentiated to generate the velocity in the primary flight direction and plotted in combination
with noise data.

(a) case C1

(b) case D1

Figure 11: Mic #5 SPL spectrogram, OASPL and vertical speed data of flight cases C1 and D1.
Figure 11 presents the SPL spectrogram at the microphone #5 (at the mid-height) of the vertical
flight cases C1 and D1. The corresponding OASPL and instantaneous vertical speed data are
also plotted, respectively. The results indicate that the acceleration and deceleration in the axial
Page | 11

flight direction cause instantaneous rotor speed change, which results in spectral and OASPL
variations. Generally, upward (-z) acceleration leads to an increment in OASPL and downward
(+z) acceleration leads to a decrease in OASPL. This is a reasonable consequence of the rotor
speed change due to lifting power variation. It is worth mentioning that when the drone was at a
similar height to microphone #5 in the climb/descent process, a low OASPL was measured, which
corresponds to the directivity map illustrated in the last subsection.

Figure 12: Mic #15 SPL spectrogram, OASPL and horizontal speed data of flight case F.
Figure 12 presents the SPL spectrogram at microphone #15 of the cruise flight case F. The
OASPL and instantaneous horizontal speed data are also plotted. Separated tones can be
observed from the spectrogram, which indicates the rotor speed difference during cruise flight.
At around 11 s, the drone flew over the microphone and generated a prominent pressure
fluctuation at low frequencies due to rotor wake. Meanwhile, a decrease in the measured
broadband noise occurs.

4.

Conclusions

Noise measurements of a quad-rotor drone were performed in an anechoic chamber with both
full anechoic and hemi-anechoic configurations. Good repeatabilities of both position and
acoustic data were obtained. The comparison between the results of the two configurations (fullanechoic and hemi-anechoic) revealed the influence of ground reflection on the drone noise
measurement. Moreover, the acoustic interference caused by ground reflection can deviate from
the measured spectra, especially at low frequencies. Thus, using a hemi-anechoic chamber
could considerably degrade the tonal noise assessment accuracy.
The noise directivity in hover flight condition was measured by adjusting the position and the
heading angle of the drone. The spherical directivity of broadband OASPL and different tones
were obtained. The directivity patterns show observable correlations with the airframe geometry
and rotor configuration, possibly caused by rotor-rotor and rotor-airframe interactions, which
requires further investigation. The measurements of dynamic flight cases were analysed in
combination with the instantaneous position data, which revealed the noise features of the drone
in dynamic flight states.
Page | 12

References
[1] Floreano, D., & Wood, R. J. (2015). Science, technology and the future of small autonomous
drones. Nature, 521(7553), 460-466.
[2] Christian, A. W., & Cabell, R. (2017). Initial investigation into the psychoacoustic properties of
small unmanned aerial system noise. AIAA Paper 2017-4051.
[3] Torija, A. J., & Clark, C. (2021). A psychoacoustic approach to building knowledge about
human response to noise of unmanned aerial vehicles. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 18(2), 682.
[4] Tinney, C. E., & Sirohi, J. (2018). Multirotor drone noise at static thrust. AIAA Journal, 56(7),
2816-2826.
[5] Zawodny, N.S., Christian, A., & Cabell, R. (2018). A summary of NASA research exploring
the acoustics of small unmanned aerial systems. AHS Paper 20180002208.
[6] Alexander, W. N., Whelchel, J., Intaratep, N., & Trani, A. (2019). Predicting community noise
of sUAS. AIAA Paper 2017-2686.
[7] Cabell, R., Grosveld, F., & McSwain, R. (2016). Measured noise from small unmanned aerial
vehicles. NOISE-CON Paper 20160010139.
[8] Heutschi, K., Ott, B., Nussbaumer, T., & Wellig, P. (2020). Synthesis of real world drone
signals based on lab recordings. Acta Acustica, 4(6), 24.
[9] Zhou, T., Jiang, H., Sun, Y., Fattah, R. J., Zhang, X., Huang, B., & Cheng, L. (2019). Acoustic
characteristics of a quad-copter under realistic flight conditions. AIAA Paper 2019-2587.
[10] European Commission. (2019). Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/945 of 12
March 2019 on unmanned aircraft systems and on third-country operators of unmanned
aircraft systems. European Commission.
[11] Sanchez-Cuevas, P., Heredia, G., & Ollero, A. (2017). Characterization of the aerodynamic
ground effect and its influence in multirotor control. International Journal of Aerospace
Engineering, 2017, 1823056.
[12] Welch, P. (1967). The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra: a
method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms. IEEE Transactions on
Audio and Electroacoustics, 15(2), 70-73.
[13] ISO. (2012). ISO 3745:2012, Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels and sound
energy levels of noise sources using sound pressure — Precision methods for anechoic
rooms and hemi-anechoic rooms. International Organization for Standardization.

Page | 13

