Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40857-024-00327-x

ORIGINAL PAPER

Experimental Assessment of the Flow Recirculation Effect on the Noise
Measurement of a Free-Flying Multi-rotor UAS in a Closed Anechoic
Chamber
Zhida Ma1 · Peng Zhou1 · Xin Zhang1 · Siyang Zhong2
Received: 5 February 2024 / Accepted: 20 May 2024 / Published online: 12 June 2024
© The Author(s) 2024

Abstract
The flow recirculation effect on the noise measurement of a multi-rotor unmanned aircraft system (UAS) hovering in a
closed anechoic chamber is experimentally characterized in this work. The measured acoustic spectrogram reveals that the
recirculation forms around 30 s after the UAS’s take-off, manifested as prominent fluctuations in blade passage frequency
and its harmonics. However, the instantaneous overall sound pressure level shows no obvious increase with the development
of the recirculation. The result indicates that the recirculation effect does not significantly change the total acoustic energy
but increases the uncertainties in the spectral distribution, which can be quantified by spectral entropy. The quantitative
analysis of different noise components shows that the recirculation has a minimal effect on the tonal noise levels but slightly
increases the broadband noise level out of the rotors’ plane. The results from parametric tests suggest that this broadband
noise increment has a positive correlation with the UAS’s hover height but a negative correlation with the UAS’s gross mass.
The comparison with existing studies highlights the difference in the recirculation effect on the noise of isolated rotor(s) and
free-flying multi-rotor UAS in confined spaces.
Keywords Drone noise · Rotor noise · UAV · UAS · Turbulence ingestion · Recirculation

1 Introduction
With the anticipated future operation of multi-rotor unmanned
aircraft system (UAS) in densely populated urban areas for
various applications, the issue of their noise emissions is one
of the major factors affecting public acceptance [1]. The
growing public attention surrounding UAS noise necessitates the implementation of certification and regulations to
mitigate this potential risk to public health [2]. The certification process requires accurate noise assessment of the
UAS. Anechoic chambers provide controlled low-noise anechoic environments for accurate noise measurements and are
widely used in aerospace and acoustic research. Such facili-

B Siyang Zhong

siyang.zhong@polyu.edu.hk

1

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear
Water Bay, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong SAR, China

2

Department of Aeronautical and Aviation Engineering, The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Hom, Kowloon
999077, Hong Kong SAR, China

ties have been extensively utilized for studying the acoustic
characteristics of multi-rotor UASs and their propulsion units
in a controlled and echo-free setting, enabling detailed analysis of their noise generation mechanisms [3–5]. Recently, the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) published a standard on the noise measurements for UAS [6]. The
standard specifies the procedures and requirements for noise
measurements of UAS using anechoic chambers. However,
due to the confined space, the presence of flow recirculation
within anechoic chambers can introduce additional complexities to the noise measurements [7]. Since the rotors propel
the fluid to produce thrust, the turbulent wake from the rotors
can recirculate within the space and finally be ingested by the
rotors. The ingestion of this turbulent flow leads to additional
unsteady loading on the rotors’ blades, which can significantly alter the aerodynamic and aeroacoustic characteristics
of the rotors from them being operated in a clean inflow
condition [8]. Therefore, investigations into this flow recirculation effect are important for a better understanding of the
UAS noise measurements using anechoic chambers.
Previous research has been done to investigate the recirculation effect on isolated rotors. Stephenson et al. [7] tested the

123

314

noise of a small-scale propeller with a diameter D = 240 mm
operating at 5200 RPM in a closed anechoic chamber. The
results suggest that recirculation can increase the measured
noise by over 15 dB at the blade passage frequency (BPF)
harmonics. They attributed this phenomenon to the unsteady
loading caused by the recirculation, as the increase occurs
predominantly out of the rotor plane. With the rotor producing a 0.75 lb (3.34 N) thrust, the formation time of the
recirculation is around 4 s. Subsequently, with the same
experimental setup, Weitsman et al. [9] studied the effect of
recirculation on the force and torque measurement, as well as
several treatments to mitigate the intensity of recirculation.
They found that as the recirculation manifests, apart from
the evident amplification in BPF harmonics, the broadband
noise is also amplified. Meanwhile, the envelope of the measured thrust is modulated, and the rotational rate of the rotor
presents higher fluctuation levels. The downstream mesh was
found to effectively prolong the onset and reduce the intensity
of the recirculation. Nadari et al. [10] performed numerical
simulations and found that the flow recirculation leads to
a nearly 5 dBA increase in the overall sound pressure level
(OASPL) contributed by the increased SPL at BPF harmonics. Their beamforming-based source identification results
suggest that the dominant mechanism for excessive noise is
the leading-edge interaction at around 80% of the blade span,
which is effective in the low-to-middle frequency range. A
slight enhancement in the high-frequency range due to the
trailing-edge noise mechanism is also identified. Bu et al. [11]
measured the noise of dual small-scale (D = 280 mm) rotors
operating in a co-planar configuration in an anechoic chamber. At a rotational speed of 5400 RPM, the comparison with
a single rotor case shows that the dual propeller configuration
shortens the formation time of the recirculation from 4.5 to
2.5 s.
While stationary-mounted rotors offer more control authority and fewer uncertainties in the anechoic chamber tests, the
results may not directly reflect the recirculation effect on
actual multi-rotor UASs operated in such confined spaces.
The presence of an airframe and the acoustic interference
of different rotors can alter the noise features of a multirotor UAS from isolated rotors. Moreover, as no mounting
structure is attached to a free-flying UAS and the rotors are
not controlled at constant speeds, the system can have more
degrees of freedom. Therefore, investigating the recirculation
effect on the noise testing of multi-rotor UASs within confined spaces is necessary, which is the aim of this study. We
conducted experimental campaigns to capture the changes in
noise characteristics resulting from flow recirculation, with
systematic quantitative analysis to enhance our understanding of the underlying mechanisms and their implications for
noise assessment.
The following sections are arranged as follows: Sect. 2
first illustrates the experimental setup and the test procedures

123

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

to capture the formation of the recirculation. Then, the test
matrix for the parametric studies on the influences of hover
height and UAS mass is listed. Section 3 presents the characterization of the recirculation effect on noise, including
the time-frequency spectrogram features and the quantitative analysis of sound pressure levels (SPL) of different noise
components. Then, the effects of the two influencing factors
are analyzed and the possible mechanisms are discussed. Section 4 summarizes the work.

2 Experimental Setup and Methods
2.1 Test Apparatus
The experiments were conducted in the anechoic chamber of the Aerodynamic and Acoustic Facility at the Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology. The chamber
has wedge tip-to-tip dimensions of 8.1 m (L) × 6 m (W) ×
5.1 m (H) and a cut-off frequency of 100 Hz. Figure 1 shows
a photo of the experimental setup.
A DJI Phantom 4 Pro quad-rotor UAS was used in the
experiment. The UAS is lifted by four fixed-pitch, twobladed, type 9450 rotors with a diameter of 240 mm. The
diagonal rotor distance is 350 mm and the gross mass is
1.4 kg. During the tests, the position of the UAS was remotely
controlled by a pilot outside the chamber and maintained
by the visual sensing module equipped by the UAS. The
onboard camera transmits real-time images to the remote
control terminal and serves as a reference for the UAS to
hover above the center mark. The UAS’s height is estimated
from its multi-sensor fused data and indicated on the remote
control terminal.
The noise was measured using five 1/4" GRAS 46BE
free-field condenser microphones, which were individually
calibrated using a GRAS 42AG sound calibrator. The microphones were in a vertical plane that passes the horizontal
center of the chamber. All microphones were equipped with
windscreens to alleviate the influence of airflow on measured
noise. The detailed dimensions of the microphone setup are
illustrated in Fig. 1. A National Instruments PXIe-4497 module with a PXIe-1073 chassis was used to record the acoustic
data. The sampling rate was 50 kHz, and a record time of 60 s
was used for each test.

2.2 Test Methods
To capture the formation process of flow recirculation and
its effect on noise measurements, a test protocol was determined. The procedures are illustrated as follows:
Step 1 Recording starts; meanwhile, the rotors of the UAS
rotate at an idle speed.

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

315

Fig. 1 Left: photo of the experimental setup in the anechoic chamber. Right: detailed dimensions of the microphone setup with a 3.2 m UAS hover
height (view perpendicular to the microphone plane)

Step 2 Control the UAS to climb to the target hover position
quickly (duration < 3 s).
Step 3 Maintain hovering at the target position until the 60-s
sampling period is over.
Step 4 Land the UAS.
Step 5 Wait for at least 5 min to ensure an environment with
quiescent air before the next test.
Two factors that can influence the flow recirculation are
investigated in this work. One is the hover height of the UAS,
as it determines the recirculation flow pattern in the chamber and the turbulence intensity at the rotors’ positions. The
other one is the gross mass of the UAS, which determines
the rotor speeds and mass flow rate through the rotor disks,
consequently affecting the recirculation flow speed and overall turbulence intensity. The test matrix for the parametric
investigation on these two factors is shown by Table 1. Three
test data points were designed for both parameters, and four
repeated tests were conducted for each data point. The heading angle of the UAS was varied such that its front, left, back,
and right directions were aligned with the microphone plane
in the four repeated tests, respectively.

representative SPL spectrum obtained from microphone #3
when the UAS hovered at a height of 2.7 m.
To extract the tonal and broadband noise components for
quantitative analyses, different techniques are applied to the
raw spectrum. For the broadband noise, a moving median filter is applied to the raw spectrum to filter out the tonal spikes
[14]. However, due to the wide tonal spikes caused by the
fluctuations in rotor speeds, the filtered result is biased toward
a higher level. Thus, a moving minimum filter is applied to
the raw spectrum to account for this bias effect, and the result
is averaged with the moving median spectrum. Finally, the
averaged spectrum is smoothed by a Gaussian filter, which
results in the desired broadband noise spectrum, as shown
by the dark dashed line in Fig. 2. Considering the wide tonal
spikes, tonal SPL is calculated by narrow-band integration.
The band of a specific tone is defined as the part with SPL no
lower than −20 dB of the peak value, as shown in the right
part of Fig. 2.

3 Results and Discussions
3.1 Characterization of the Recirculation Effect

2.3 Acoustic Data Post-processing
The short-time Fourier transform (STFT) is applied to the
raw acoustic data to obtain the time-frequency noise characteristics, alongside Welch’s method is used for smoother
spectra [12, 13]. The STFT calculation uses a fast Fourier
transform (FFT) size of 104 and a Hann window with 50%
overlap, resulting in a frequency resolution of 5 Hz and a time
resolution of 0.1 s. For the time-averaged acoustic spectra, a
selected data segment is processed using an FFT size of 104
and a Hann window with 50% overlap. Figure 2 shows a

Since the effect of recirculation on noise measurement of
UASs can vary a lot depending on the specific test setup, a
characterization of the recirculation effect is crucial before
any quantitative analysis. A representative SPL spectrogram
is shown in the Fig. 3. From the spectrogram, it can be
observed that before the moment a (∼5 s), the BPF shows
a trend of increase–decrease–increase and then becomes
constant, which corresponds to the UAS’s accelerationdeceleration and hover motion. From the moment a, the tones
on the spectrogram have almost no drift, indicating the UAS

123

316

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

Table 1 Test matrix for the parametric investigation on the influences of hover height and gross mass
Influence factor (variable)

Hover height (m)

Gross mass (kg)

Hover height

2.2

1.4

2.7
3.2
Gross mass

2.7

1.6
1.8
2.0

The UAS itself weighs 1.4 kg, payloads were added to vary the gross mass

Fig. 2 Left: raw spectrum, spectra processed using moving median and moving minimum algorithms, respectively, and the resultant broadband
spectrum of a test case. Right: zoomed view at the SPL spike at BPF, the band of this tone is defined as the part with SPL no lower than −20 dB of
the peak level, and the tonal SPL is calculated by the spectral integration within this band

entered a relatively stable hover condition. At around the
moment b (∼30 s), prominent random fluctuations of BPF
harmonics arise on the spectrogram as a result of the unstable
rotor speeds. This is inferred to be caused by the recirculation
of the rotors’ wake, which leads to the turbulent inflow of the
rotors and disturbances to the stable hover state. The fluctuations in BPF harmonics are a consequence of the UAS trying
to maintain its position under these disturbances. Therefore,
the moment b can be regarded as the transition from a prerecirculation flow regime to a post-recirculation regime. It is
worth noting that the precise determination of this transition
moment is not feasible as the intensity of the tonal fluctuations increases gradually.
Although obvious fluctuations can be observed on the
spectrogram, the instantaneous OASPL integrated from 100
to 20,000 Hz, as shown by the blue curve in Fig. 3, does
not show a significant deviation after the recirculation develops but presents slight higher fluctuation values up to 2 dB.
Hence, the instantaneous OASPL value cannot distinguish
the transition into the post-recirculation flow regime. To
quantify these uncertain fluctuations that appear on the
spectrogram, spectral entropy (SE), a spectral descriptor
reflecting the irregularity of the signal in the frequency
domain, is introduced [15]. For a given power spectrogram
S(t, k), the frequency domain probability distribution within
a certain frequency band at time t is:

123

P(t, k) = b

S(t, k)
2

k=b1 S(t, k)

,

(1)

where k represents the frequency bin number, b1 and b2
are the frequency band edges in bins. The instantaneous SE
within this band is calculated as [16]:
SE(t) =

−

 b2

k=b1 P(t, k) log(P(t, k))

log (b2 − b1 )

.

(2)

Since the fluctuations of BPF harmonics occur in a relatively low-frequency range, the frequency band of 100 Hz
to 2000 Hz is chosen for SE calculations herein. An FFT size
of 105 and a Hann window with 50% overlap are used to
match the timescale of the spectral fluctuations. The result of
the test case is shown by the orange curve in Fig. 3. It can be
seen that from the moment a, following a dramatic drop after
the take-off maneuver, the SE stays at a relatively low value.
Around the moment b, which is in the transition region, the
SE gradually increases by about 0.1 (17%) and remains at a
relatively high value afterward. The SE exhibits a consistent
trend with the fluctuation intensity of the tonal frequencies
in the spectrogram and, therefore, can be used as a reference
to detect the formation of the recirculation.

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

317

Fig. 3 Top: the measured spectrogram at microphone #3 with a hover height of 3 m and UAS gross mass of 1.4 kg. Bottom: instantaneous OASPL
and SE values

The detailed SPL spectral difference between the pre- and
post-recirculation regimes in the aforementioned test case is
shown in Fig. 4. The SPL spectra are computed using 20-s
segments from the total 60-s data for the two flow regimes.
The segment for the pre-recirculation regime is from 5 to
25 s, while the segment for the post-recirculation regime is
from 35 to 55 s. It is evident that in the post-recirculation
regime, the tonal spikes become broader, and two or more
separated spikes can be present at high-order BPF harmonics. Meanwhile, the peak values of the tonal spikes generally
decrease following the formation of the recirculation, and
the decrements are more prominent at higher BPF harmonics. This phenomenon is attributed to the time-averaged
impact of rotor speed fluctuations caused by recirculation
disturbances.
Notably, the results of this experiment diverge from those
reported by the existing experimental studies, in which cases
substantial increases in SPL were measured at blade-passing
frequency (BPF) harmonics due to flow recirculation [7, 9,
11]. Several factors are speculated to account for the disparity. First, the chamber used in our work is significantly
larger, approximately 8 and 12 times the volume of the ones
employed by Stephenson et al. [7] and Bu et al. [11], respectively. This disparity results in lower turbulence intensity
within the recirculation zone and a longer onset time. Sec-

ond, the rotor-airframe interaction in our case is expected
to generate high SPLs at BPF harmonics, which can potentially outweigh the effect of flow recirculation [17, 18]. This
interaction mechanism is unlikely to be dominant in other
studies as there are no structures in proximity to the rotor
blades. Last but not least, with more degrees of freedom, the
hovering UAS’s rotors in our case experience greater speed
fluctuations compared to a statically mounted single rotor,
causing the acoustic energy to disperse around BPF harmonics rather than being concentrated at specific frequencies.
A quantitative comparison of the tonal SPL of the first
four BPF harmonics and broadband OASPL, as well as SE
between the pre- and post-recirculation flow regimes from
the test case are presented in Table 2. The SPL data are processed using the method outlined in Sect. 2.3. The results
indicate that the tonal noise levels remain largely unaffected
by the presence of flow recirculation. Meanwhile, a slight
increase in the extracted broadband noise level is observed
particularly out of the UAS’s rotor plane. This increment is
inferred to be caused by the enhanced unsteady blade loading
due to the ingestion of the recirculated turbulent structures,
and the directivity trend is consistent with the characteristics of loading noise [19]. The SE increases by 0.07∼0.08
(12%∼13%) at tested microphone locations, no prominent
directivity was found for the SE increments.

123

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

SPL (dB)

SPL (dB)

SPL (dB)

318

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

pre-recirculation
post-recirculation

102

103

104

Frequency (Hz)
Fig. 4 Comparison of the SPL spectra measured in pre- and post-recirculation flow regimes at microphones #1 (top), #3 (middle), and #5 (bottom)

Table 2 SPL variations of different noise components and SE variation between pre- and post-recirculation flow regimes
Microphone

SPL1BPF (dB)

SPL2BPF (dB)

SPL3BPF (dB)

SPL4BPF (dB)

OASPLbroadband (dB)

SE

#1

−0.25

0.25

0.21

−0.54

1.08

0.068

#2

−0.24

−0.84

0.66

−0.27

1.26

0.073

#3

−0.16

−0.89

0.40

−0.24

1.43

0.083

#4

−0.15

−0.69

0.39

−0.12

1.29

0.079

#5

−0.13

−0.53

0.04

0.02

2.03

0.082

SPL = SPLpost-recirculation − SPLpre-recirculation , SE = SEpost-recirculation − SEpre-recirculation

3.2 Effect of Hover Height
The results for the parametric study on the effect of hover
height are shown in Fig. 5. Significantly higher standard variations of the 1BPF tonal SPL when the UAS was hovering at
2.7 m are present on the graph. After a data examination, this
is caused by the data from a single test and can be attributed
to testing uncertainty. The general SPL differences between
the two flow regimes are consistent with the aforementioned
test case, which is almost no variations in the tonal SPL, and
slight increases in the broadband OASPLs. The variation in
hover height does not have a prominent effect on the tonal
SPL differences, but the broadband OASPL increment has
a discernible increasing trend with the hover height. This
trend suggests that the intensity of the rotors’ interaction
with the recirculation enhances when the UAS hovers at a
higher height. Speculations for this phenomenon are that at

123

a higher height, the UAS is hovering closer to the ceiling,
where the recirculated flow is expected to be less uniform
and non-axial to the rotors, leading to stronger disturbances
to the UAS and higher levels of unsteady blade loading [20].
While the UAS hovers at a lower height yet still far from
encountering the aerodynamic ground effect, the inflow of
the rotors becomes more aligned with the axial direction due
to the induced velocity, and the turbulence intensity can be
reduced after a longer convection distance.

3.3 Effect of Gross Mass
Figure 6 shows the SPL differences of the UAS hovering
under varied payload mass. Similar to the previous cases,
there are no obvious variations in tonal SPLs, but slight
increases in the broadband OASPLs are observed after the
recirculation develops. An interesting and counterintuitive

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

319

Fig. 5 SPL variations of different noise components and SE variation between the two flow regimes. Data points are the averaged value from four
repeated tests, error bars indicate the ±1 standard deviation

123

320

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

Fig. 6 SPL variations of different noise components and SE variation between the two flow regimes. Data points are the averaged value from four
repeated tests, error bars indicate the ±1 standard deviation

123

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322

result is that the broadband OASPL increment shows a
decreasing trend with the gross mass. Meanwhile, the uncertainties in broadband OASPL also reduce. The reason for
this phenomenon is most possibly that the increased payload
mass adds inertia to the UAS, making it less vulnerable to
the disturbances caused by the recirculation. This stabilizing effect can lead to fewer rotor speed fluctuations, hence
reducing the enhancement of broadband noise.

4 Summary
The experimental results have characterized the effect of the
flow recirculation on the acoustic measurement of a freeflying multi-rotor UAS in a closed anechoic facility. The
major effect is the disturbances caused by the recirculated
turbulent structures to the hovering UAS, leading to fluctuations in rotor speeds and, consequently, uncertainties in
the tonal noise. These uncertainties lead to a more random
spectral distribution of the acoustic energy, but the measured
OASPL remains at the same level throughout the development of the recirculation. Spectral entropy is introduced to
quantify these uncertainties in the frequency domain, and the
calculated SE shows a reasonable increasing trend with the
formation of the recirculation. The SPLs of different noise
components extracted using the proposed method indicate
that the recirculation has a negligible effect on the tonal SPLs
at the first four BPF harmonics but slightly (∼2 dB) enhances
the broadband OASPL out of the rotor plane. The parametric investigation reveals that the broadband noise increment
due to recirculation has a positive correlation with the hover
height of the UAS but a negative correlation with the UAS’s
gross mass. Higher flow nonuniformity due to ceiling effect
and increased inertia are inferred to be the major reasons
accounting for these two correlations, respectively.
The effect of flow recirculation on measured noise in this
study differs from those reported in existing studies [7, 9, 11].
Notably, a significantly lesser influence on the noise level
due to recirculation is observed. Although the difference in
the dimension of the test facility shall be acknowledged, the
comparison highlights the distinction between testing statically mounted propulsion unit(s) and free-flying UASs in
such confined environments. One aspect is the presence of an
airframe and multiple rotors can lead to strong interactions,
which make the noise characteristics of the UAS inherently
different from those of a propulsion unit mounted on a test
rig. Another aspect is that the recirculation can disturb the
hover state of the UAS and lead to fluctuations in rotor speeds,
which cause extra uncertainties in noise compared to rotors
controlled at constant speeds. Therefore, a characterization of

321

the flow recirculation effect before conducting any accurate
acoustic assessments is important for UAS noise assessments
in closed facilities.
Funding Open access funding provided by The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
1. Schäffer, B., Pieren, R., Heutschi, K., Wunderli, J.M., Becker, S.:
Drone noise emission characteristics and noise effects on humans-a
systematic review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 18(11), 5940
(2021)
2. Torija, A.J., Nicholls, R.K.: Investigation of metrics for assessing
human response to drone noise. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
19(6), 3152 (2022)
3. Zawodny, N.S., Douglas Boyd Jr, D., Burley, C.L.: Acoustic characterization and prediction of representative, small-scale rotarywing unmanned aircraft system components. American Helicopter
Society (AHS) Annual Forum Proceedings, (NF1676L-22587)
(2016)
4. Zhou, T., Jiang, H., Sun, Y., Fattah, R.J., Zhang, X., Huang, B.,
Cheng, L.: Acoustic characteristics of a quad-copter under realistic
flight conditions. AIAA Paper, 2019-2587 (2019)
5. Huanxian, B., Ma, Z., Zhong, S.: An experimental investigation
of noise characteristics of overlapping propellers. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 152(1), 591–600 (2022)
6. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 5305:2024
Noise measurements for UAS (unmanned aircraft systems).
Geneva, CH (2024)
7. Stephenson, J.H., Weitsman, D., Zawodny, N.S.: Effects of flow
recirculation on unmanned aircraft system (UAS) acoustic measurements in closed anechoic chambers. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
145(3), 1153–1155 (2019)
8. Hanson, D.B.: Spectrum of rotor noise caused by atmospheric turbulence. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 56(1), 110–126 (1974)
9. Weitsman, D., Stephenson, J.H., Zawodny, N.S.: Effects of flow
recirculation on acoustic and dynamic measurements of rotarywing systems operating in closed anechoic chambers. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 148(3), 1325–1336 (2020)
10. Nardari, C., Casalino, D., Polidoro, F., Coralic, V., Lew, P-T.,
Brodie, J.: Numerical and experimental investigation of flow confinement effects on UAV rotor noise. AIAA Paper, 2019-2497
(2019)

123

322
11. Huanxian, B., Han, W., Bertin, C., Fang, Y., Zhong, S.: Aerodynamic and acoustic measurements of dual small-scale propellers.
J. Sound Vib. 511, 116330 (2021)
12. Fulop, S.A., Fitz, K.: Algorithms for computing the time-corrected
instantaneous frequency (reassigned) spectrogram, with applications. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 119(1), 360–371 (2006)
13. Welch, P.: The use of fast fourier transform for the estimation of
power spectra: a method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms. IEEE Trans. Audio Electroacoust. 15(2), 70–73
(1967)
14. Fitzgerald, D.: Harmonic/percussive separation using median filtering. In: Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on
Digital Audio Effects (DAFx) 13, pp. 1–4 (2010)
15. Shannon, C.E.: A mathematical theory of communication. Bell
Syst. Techn. J. 27(3), 379–423 (1948)
16. Misra, H., Ikbal, S., Bourlard, H., Hermansky, H.: Spectral entropy
based feature for robust ASR. In: Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) 1, pp. I–193 (2004)

123

Acoustics Australia (2024) 52:313–322
17. Zawodny, N.S., Boyd, D.D.: Investigation of rotor-airframe interaction noise associated with small-scale rotary-wing unmanned
aircraft systems. J. Am. Helicopter Soc. 65(1), 1–17 (2020)
18. Yan, W., Kingan, M.J., Go, S.T.: Propeller-strut interaction tone
noise. Phys. Fluids 34(5) (2022)
19. Kurtz, D.W., Marte, J.E.: A review of aerodynamic noise from
propellers, rotors, and lift fans. NASA Technical Report, NASA32-7462 (1970)
20. Gao, S., Di Franco, C., Carter, D., Quinn, D., Bezzo, N.: Exploiting
ground and ceiling effects on autonomous UAV motion planning.
In: Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pp. 768–777 (2019)

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

