OCTOBER 01 2013

Room geometry inference based on spherical microphone
array eigenbeam processing
Edwin Mabande; Konrad Kowalczyk; Haohai Sun; Walter Kellermann

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 134, 2773–2789 (2013)
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4820895

 
View
Online

Export
Citation

Articles You May Be Interested In
Localization of distinct reflections in rooms using spherical microphone array eigenbeam processing
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (April 2012)

Time-frequency-dependent directional analysis of room reflections using eigenbeam processing and von
Mises–Fisher clustering
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (April 2022)

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (November 2006)

01 September 2026 16:58:16

Eigenbeam beamforming for microphone arrays

Room geometry inference based on spherical microphone array
eigenbeam processing
Edwin Mabandea),b) and Konrad Kowalczykb)
Chair of Multimedia Communications and Signal Processing (LMS), University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Cauerstrasse 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

Haohai Sunc)
Norwegian University of Science and Technology

Walter Kellermann
Chair of Multimedia Communications and Signal Processing, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Cauerstrasse 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

(Received 2 April 2013; revised 16 August 2013; accepted 26 August 2013)

PACS number(s): 43.55.Mc, 43.60.Fg, 43.55.Br [NX]

I. INTRODUCTION

The extraction of parameters characterizing an acoustic
environment using acoustic signals is a topic of increasing
interest in the field of acoustic signal processing as these parameters may then be used to enhance the performance of
classical signal processing algorithms. A wide range of useful parameters characterizing an acoustic space may be estimated, including the directions of arrival (DOAs) and the
strengths of early room reflections,1,2 the speed of sound,3
and the room volume.4 However, the ultimate challenge in
this context is to estimate the geometry of the entire acoustic
enclosure. The knowledge of room geometry can be used to
improve the performance of source localization algorithms5
and signal enhancement methods,6–8 and to compensate for
reverberation in sound field reproduction.9
Recently the topic of inferring the room geometry has
gained wider interest among many research groups.
Typically, this involves the measurement and processing of

a)

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:
etmabande@gmail.de
Present address: International Audio Laboratories Erlangen, Fraunhofer
IIS, Am Wolfsmantel 33, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.
c)
Present address: Cisco Systems Norway AS, Philip Pedersens vei 1, 1336
Lysaker, Norway.
b)

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 134 (4), October 2013

Pages: 2773–2789

many room impulse responses (RIRs).1,2,10,11 G€unel2 proposed a boundary plane parameter estimation method that
uses the time of arrival (TOA) of the first reflection only,
where hierarchical grouping, for many source positions, is
applied to avoid estimates of the same plane. Antonacci
et al.1 proposed a method where a common tangent algorithm is applied to the 2D reflector localization based on
TOAs of reflections estimated from RIR measurements for a
moving source. The method has been extended by Filos
et al.12 and Antonacci et al.13 to 2D room inference, where
space parameterization based on the Hough transform is
applied to disambiguate between TOAs of reflections from
different walls and reflection orders, and also to increase the
robustness against noise in TOA estimation. Apart from
measured RIRs, it was claimed that short impulsive signals13
such as hand clapping and finger snapping could also be
applied as sources. Given a set of RIRs measured simultaneously using a set of array microphones, one of the main challenges is to associate the peaks corresponding to the same
reflector, which is typically required when estimating TOAs
of reflections directly from measured RIRs. Contrary to the
above approach, where the number of walls must be known
a priori, a heuristic method for room geometry inference
without any assumption on the number of reflectors was proposed by Tervo et al.,14 where a set of reflective planes is
deduced iteratively. Dokmanic et al.15 proposed a method

0001-4966/2013/134(4)/2773/17/$30.00

C 2013 Acoustical Society of America
V

2773

01 September 2026 16:58:16

The knowledge of parameters characterizing an acoustic environment, such as the geometric
information about a room, can be used to enhance the performance of several audio applications. In
this paper, a novel method for three-dimensional room geometry inference based on robust and
high-resolution beamforming techniques for spherical microphone arrays is presented. Unlike other
approaches that are based on the measurement and processing of multiple room impulse responses,
here, microphone array signal processing techniques for uncontrolled broadband acoustic signals
are applied. First, the directions of arrival (DOAs) and time differences of arrival (TDOAs) of the
direct signal and room reflections are estimated using high-resolution robust broadband beamforming techniques and cross-correlation analysis. In this context, the main challenges include the low
reflected-signal to background-noise power ratio, the low energy of reflected signals relative to the
direct signal, and their strong correlation with the direct signal and among each other. Second, the
DOA and TDOA information is combined to infer the room geometry using geometric relations.
The high accuracy of the proposed room geometry inference technique is confirmed by experimental evaluations based on both simulated and measured data for moderately reverberant rooms.
C 2013 Acoustical Society of America. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4820895]
V

2774

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

In the sequel, the paper is structured as follows: An
overview of the proposed room geometry inference method
is presented in Sec. II, and the spherical microphone array
eigenbeam processing and frequency smoothing techniques
for processing coherent reflected signals are briefly reviewed
in Sec. III. The proposed methods for beamformer-based
DOA and TDOA estimation of room reflections are
described in Secs. IV and V, respectively. The method to
infer the boundary plane parameters is then presented in Sec.
VI. The presented technique is experimentally verified using
both measured and simulated data in Sec. VII, followed by
concluding remarks in Sec. VIII.
II. ROOM GEOMETRY INFERENCE METHOD

In this section, an overview of the proposed method for
room geometry inference is presented, which in general
allows for full three-dimensional (3D) geometry inference of
an acoustic enclosure with walls that are piecewise planar
and whose overall geometry is convex. When a source signal
is produced or played back via a loudspeaker, a compact
microphone array located within the same room samples the
produced wave field, which includes the direct signal, multiple boundary reflections, as well as background noise.
Figure 1 depicts an exemplary scenario, where a source in a
room results in a reflection from one of the planar room
boundaries. It is assumed that the impinging wave is
reflected from the boundary in a specular fashion.22 Such an
assumption is justified for most planar room boundaries that
are sufficiently reflective for a wide frequency range. The
corresponding first-order image source, which is defined as a
point that is mirrored with respect to the boundary, and a
background noise source are also shown.
The localization of major reflectors in a room and hence
the inference of room geometry can be achieved based solely
on the recorded microphone signals and the knowledge on
the relative position of the source, i.e., the DOA and distance
of the source to the microphone array. Thus, this approach
does not involve measuring RIRs and can generally be
applied for any source signals which provide sufficient excitation for room modes across frequencies of interest.

FIG. 1. Reflection due to a planar boundary.
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

that infers the room geometry from only one RIR. However,
the algorithm requires the knowledge of TOAs of all firstand second-order reflections, which may be very challenging
to achieve in practice. Ba et al.11 and Ribeiro et al.16 proposed methods to estimate the room shape by fitting a shoebox room model to a set of measured RIRs.
In earlier work, the authors of this paper presented a robust and accurate beamformer-based method for DOA estimation of room reflections.17 Furthermore, the localization
of points of reflection was also demonstrated.18,19
In this paper, a novel beamforming-based technique to
localize the positions of reflecting surfaces in a room, thus
inferring the room geometry, is proposed. The signals captured by relatively small spherical microphone arrays are
used to estimate the DOAs and time differences of arrival
(TDOAs) of reflected signals. Then, by applying several geometric relations, the positions and orientations of room
boundary planes can be estimated. Note that in contrast to
most approaches found in the literature, e.g., Refs. 1, 2, 10,
14, and 15, the proposed technique does not involve measuring RIRs and can therefore be applied to any broadband
source signal, e.g., speech or music.
In the first step, the robust beamformer-based method17
for DOA estimation is applied. In the second step, a method
to accurately estimate TDOAs, which is based on (1) a novel
robust data-dependent beamformer design for correlated signal extraction and (2) robust cross-correlation analysis, is
applied. In contrast to the techniques used in earlier work,19
where the TDOA of only the most dominant reflection was
found, multiple TDOAs can now be estimated accurately
from only one measurement even in more adverse acoustical
conditions, e.g., low signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratios
(SINRs). This becomes possible by using a more robust
data-dependent beamformer with constrained white noise
gain (WNG) and by eliminating erroneous dominant peaks,
which result from the insufficiently suppressed direct-path
components in the cross-correlation analysis (see Sec. V B).
Therefore, these novel robustness features yield improved
performance compared to the previously used techniques.18,19 Although the cost function of the beamformer
design in the second step is similar to that in the first step,
the beamformer coefficients are now computed for the entire
frequency range of interest in order to facilitate robust correlated broadband signal extraction (see Sec. V A), as opposed
to just a single frequency as in the first step. In contrast to
Ref. 19, where only a single point of reflection was identified, the aim here is to find the positions of all room boundaries. Therefore, based on the obtained DOA and TDOA
estimates, a novel room geometry inference technique is
developed that includes categorizing the estimated boundary
planes20 and assigning them to room boundaries when signals captured for multiple source positions are processed.
A comprehensive experimental evaluation of the proposed
inference technique using both simulated and real measurements, using a compact off-the-shelf spherical microphone
array,21 is presented. The results confirm the applicability of
the proposed technique for practical acoustic scenarios, even
with adverse acoustic conditions. It is also shown that accurate
room volume estimation is possible by using this method.

the point of reflection, which lies on the boundary, can be
calculated using simple geometric relations. Apart from the
boundary point, a vector normal to the boundary plane is
also computed from the positions of the original and the
first-order image sources, which together form a pair that
fully defines the geometric information about a plane.
The method requires that each first-order image source
is visible from the microphone array for at least one source
position. Since all first-order reflections may not be visible
from the microphone array for a given source position, several source positions should be used, such that all first-order
reflections are captured, at least once. Therefore, the proposed two-step procedure can be repeated for several different sound source positions, thus obtaining multiple sets of
boundary plane parameters. These sets of planes are then
categorized, in order to cluster the planes corresponding to
the same reflecting boundary, and the final boundary parameters can be estimated by calculating an optimum fit from
the observations.

III. EIGENBEAM PROCESSING FOR REFLECTION
LOCALIZATION AND EXTRACTION
A. Spherical Fourier transform

For 3D room inference, a spherical microphone array
can be applied. Optimum array signal processing can then be
performed in the so-called eigenbeam (EB) domain,23,28
which is also referred to as the spherical harmonics domain,29 after the transformation of the original microphone
signals to the EB (spherical harmonics) domain. For completeness the spherical Fourier transform is briefly revisited
as in Ref. 17.
When a unit magnitude plane wave arrives at the sphere
of radius a from direction Xo ¼ ðho ; /o Þ, where h and / are
the elevation and azimuth angles in radians measured from
the positive z-axis and x-axis in Cartesian coordinates,
respectively, the sound pressure at any observation point
Xs ¼ ðhs ; /s Þ lying on the sphere can be expressed in the
temporal frequency domain as23
Pðka; Xo ; Xs Þ ¼

1
X
n¼0

bn ðkaÞ

n
X

½Ynm ðXo Þ Ynm ðXs Þ;

m¼n

(1)
where Ynm is the spherical harmonic of order n and degree m,
0  n  1, n  m  n, superscript  denotes complex
conjugation, bn ðkaÞ is a function of the array configuration

FIG. 2. Block diagram of the proposed
room geometry inference method.

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2775

01 September 2026 16:58:16

Such a room inference task can be accomplished by the
proposed method which consists of two stages, as depicted
in Fig. 2: In the first stage, DOAs and TDOAs are estimated
in a two-step procedure. In the second stage, the desired geometric boundary parameters are inferred, i.e., the positions
of the room boundaries. The task of simultaneously localizing multiple room reflections can be achieved using, e.g.,
subspace-based23,24 and beamformer-based source localization techniques.25,26 The aim of such acoustic source localization algorithms is to extract the DOA information
corresponding to the original source and room reflections
from signals captured by an array of microphones. When
applying beamformer-based localization methods, the room
is scanned using a beamformer, and the output power for
each look-direction is plotted to form an acoustic image of
the environment.17,18 The locations of the peaks of the
acoustic image determine the estimated DOAs. Next, the signals from the localized directions are extracted using robust
broadband beamformers with high directivity. The TDOAs
between the direct signal and each early room reflection are
then estimated using cross-correlation analysis of the
extracted signals. Such estimated TDOAs correspond to the
difference in distance that a reflected signal travels in comparison to the direct signal.
The localization and extraction of room reflections, for
DOA and TDOA estimation, respectively, is difficult even
for early and well pronounced room reflections, mainly due
to their low SINRs and their strong coherence with the direct
signal and among each other. Since each reflection is treated
as a separate coherent source, the power of a reflected signal
is lower than the power of the direct signal due to the attenuation during propagation and reflection coefficient values
being smaller than unity. Note that the other reflected signals, irrespective of their order, and the direct signal act as
interferers, and the microphone self-noise levels remain the
same. Consequently, each reflected signal has a much lower
SINR than the direct signal, and thus its extraction becomes
increasingly challenging with the order of the reflection and
the travel distance of the sound wave. In order to increase
the robustness and accuracy of room geometry inference, robust beamforming methods with focusing matrices and frequency smoothing techniques19,24 are used here, as
described in Secs. III B and IV A.
In the second stage, the DOA and TDOA information is
combined in order to estimate the locations of first-order
image sources,27 as depicted in Fig. 1. Knowing the distance
of the sound source relative to the center of the microphone
array, which is assumed to be known a priori, the position of

(with analytical expressions for rigid or open spheres given,
e.g., in Ref. 30), and wave number k ¼ x=c, where x is the
temporal angular frequency and c is the speed of sound. The
spherical Fourier transform of Pðka; Xo ; XÞ can be written
as
Pnm ðka; Xo Þ ¼ bn ðkaÞ½Ynm ðXo Þ :

(2)

When D plane waves impinge on the M-element microphone array from directions X1 ; …; XD in the presence of
uncorrelated noise, the sth microphone signal ðs ¼ 1; …; MÞ
can be expressed in the temporal frequency domain as
Xðka; Xs Þ ¼

D
X

Pðka; Xd ; Xs ÞSd ðkÞ þ Vðk; Xs Þ;

(3)

d¼1

D
X

Pnm ðka; Xd ÞSd ðkÞ þ Vnm ðkÞ;

(4)

d¼1

where Vnm ðkÞ denotes the spherical Fourier transform of the
noise. Finally, the ðN þ 1Þ2  1 signal vector X, for a given
maximum order N, can be written as17

(7)

for each frequency bin kq , q ¼ 1; …; Q, and the focusing frequency k0 2 fk1 ; …; kQ g. The closed-form solution for the
focusing matrices is given as19
(8)

where Bðkq aÞ ¼ diag½b0 ðkq aÞ; b1 ðkq aÞ; b1 ðkq aÞ; b1 ðkq aÞ;
b2 ðkq aÞ; …; bN ðkq aÞ; is an ðN þ 1Þ2  ðN þ 1Þ2 diagonal
matrix. It is the frequency-dependent mode amplitude
obtained from decoupling the array manifold matrix in (5).
^ 0 aÞ is
The focused and frequency-smoothed PSD matrix Rðk
obtained as19
Q
X
^ 0 aÞ ¼ 1
Rðk
Tðkq ÞRðkq aÞTH ðkq Þ:
Q q¼1

(9)

(5)
IV. DOA ESTIMATION


where Pðka;
XÞ ¼ ½Pðka; X1 Þ; …; Pðka; XD Þ is the
ðN þ 1Þ2  D associated manifold matrix, with each element
defined as P ¼ vecf½PnðnÞ ; Pnðnþ1Þ ; …; Pnðn1Þ ; Pnn Nn¼0 g
and vecfg represents stacking of all vectors in the parenthesis. The D  1 EB-domain source signal spectra vector
and the ðN þ 1Þ2  1 EB-domain additive noise spectrum
vector are given by SðkÞ ¼ ½S1 ðkÞ; …; SD ðkÞT and VðkÞ,
respectively.
Furthermore, the ðN þ 1Þ2  ðN þ 1Þ2 EB-domain
power spectral density (PSD) matrix is
RðkaÞ ¼ EfXðkaÞXH ðkaÞg;

(6)

where Efg denotes the statistical expectation and ðÞH is the
Hermitian transpose. Note that in practical implementations,
the number of microphones must satisfy M  ðN þ 1Þ2 to
calculate up to N-th order spherical harmonics.26
B. Frequency smoothing

The performance of many acoustic source localization
and signal extraction methods degrades when the given
sound sources in an acoustic environment are highly correlated with each other.31,32 Note that, here, the direct signal
and early room reflections are in fact strongly correlated, and
hence difficulties must be expected in localizing and extracting the desired signals. Furthermore, for high SNR and long
observation intervals, the source PSD matrix defined as
RS ðkÞ ¼ EfSðkÞSH ðkÞg can even be nearly singular and will
usually lead to an ill-conditioned PSD matrix RðkaÞ in (6)
2776

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Localization of early room reflections, illustrated in the
upper part of Fig. 3, is challenging due to the high coherence
and low energy of the reflected signals relative to the direct
signal. Therefore, a robust technique is required to accurately localize such coherent sources. For accurate boundary
parameter estimation precise acoustic source localization is
important. A comparison of several steered beamformerbased and subspace-based reflection localization techniques
has been presented in Refs. 17 and 33. The steered
beamformer-based methods have similar or higher computational cost compared to the subspace-based EB-MUSIC and
EB-ESPRIT techniques,23 respectively. However, a major limitation of the subspace methods is that the subspace dimension (i.e., the number of sources to be localized) must be
known a priori.17 Since the authors concluded that the
steered EB-domain MVDR (denoted here as EB-MVDR)
beamformer with focusing and frequency smoothing (see
Sec. III B) is the best choice for estimating the DOAs of the
direct and reflected signals,33 this beamformer is selected for
the localization purposes in this paper and is briefly reviewed
in the following.
A. Steered EB-RMVDR

The EB-MVDR beamformer is an example of a statistically optimum beamformer.7 The idea behind this beamforming technique is to minimize the output variance (or power)
subject to the constraint of a distortionless response of the
beamformer in the direction of interest. In order to increase
the robustness of EB-MVDR beamformers against
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16


XðkaÞ ¼ Pðka;
XÞSðkÞ þ VðkÞ;

 q a; XÞ
 0 a; XÞ ¼ Tðkq ÞPðk
Pðk

Tðkq Þ ¼ B1 ðkq aÞBðk0 aÞ;

where Sd ðkÞ and Vðk; Xs Þ denote D source signal spectra
and the additive noise spectrum, respectively. The nth order
and mth degree spherical Fourier transform of (3) reads30
Xnm ðkaÞ ¼

(see Refs. 17 and 31 for more details), which adversely
affects the performance of many localization and extraction
techniques. Therefore, for robust boundary parameter estimation using broadband signals, focusing matrices and frequency smoothing techniques19,24 have been proposed to
address the ill-conditioning of the PSD matrix issue. The
concept of frequency smoothing relies here on applying
ðN þ 1Þ2  ðN þ 1Þ2 focusing matrices Tðkq Þ such that

FIG. 3. Block diagram of the proposed
DOA and TDOA estimation procedure.

microphone self-noise, microphone mismatch, and positioning
errors in real microphone arrays, a robust EB-MVDR (EBRMVDR) beamformer has been proposed in Ref. 17 by incorporating a WNG constraint into the design, in addition to the
distortionless constraint in the look direction and frequency
smoothing. The cost function of the focused and frequency
smoothed EB-RMVDR beamformer can be written as17
W

subject to
WH ðk0 ÞPðk0 a; Xl Þ ¼

4p
; AWNG ðk0 Þ  f;
M

(10)

where Wðk0 Þ are the beamformer coefficients at frequency
k0 and f denotes the array gain against spatially white noise
given as
AWNG ðk0 Þ ¼

4p
1
:
M WH ðk0 ÞWðk0 Þ

(11)

V. TDOA ESTIMATION
B. Estimating DOAs of reflections

The EB-RMVDR beamformer with frequency smoothing is then used to scan the room and an acoustic image (AI)
of the environment is produced by plotting the beamformers
output power for each look direction. The locations of the
peaks of the acoustic image determine the estimated DOAs
^ Þ, i ¼ 0; …; I, where I þ 1 is the total num^ j; i ¼ ð^
h j; i ; /
X
j; i
ber of estimated DOAs, and thus I is the number of localized
reflections and i ¼ 0 denotes the DOA of the direct signal’s
path. The index j ¼ 1; …; J denotes different sound source
positions, which are used as references for subsequent proc^ Þ correspond^ j; i ¼ ð^h j; i ; /
essing. Among all the DOAs X
j; i
ing to peaks, only those DOA estimates are selected whose
power in the acoustic image exceeds the noise floor by .dB.
The exclusion of DOA estimates with low power levels is
necessary since these DOA estimates, and hence the corresponding TDOA and boundary parameter estimates, become
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Having estimated the DOAs of room reflections, the signals from the localized directions are extracted using robust
broadband beamforming techniques. As illustrated in Fig. 3,
statistical analysis of cross-correlations between the
extracted signals is then performed to estimate the TDOAs
of the reflected signals with reference to the direct signal.
A. Signal extraction

In order to extract the broadband direct and reflected
signals, robust broadband beamformers are employed. The
beamformer output signal UðkaÞ, at a given frequency kq ,
can generally be written as
Uðkq aÞ ¼ WH ðkq ÞXðkq aÞ:

(12)

Beamformers are steered toward Xj; 0 to extract the
^ Þ, for i ¼ 1; …; I, to
^ j; i ¼ ð^h j; i ; /
direct signal and toward X
j; i
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2777

01 September 2026 16:58:16

^ 0 aÞWðk0 Þ;
min WH ðk0 ÞRðk

less reliable as the power level in the acoustic image
decreases.33 Although not done here, the relative powers
could be used as reliability information for each plane estimate. An obvious method to exploit this soft information is
to use the relative signal power for determining a weighting
factor for the observation in the estimation process.
The DOA estimates that are finally obtained are
assumed to correspond to the directions of first-order reflections. This appears to be a reasonable assumption, as long as
the microphone array is positioned centrally in a room,
because the reflection coefficients of most surfaces are not
close to unity and the propagation paths of higher-order
reflections will generally be significantly longer than for the
more pronounced first-order reflections with higher amplitude. Then, higher-order reflections will exhibit significantly
lower peaks in the acoustic images than the direct signal and
dominant first-order reflections, and these peaks are then discarded as they fall below the threshold of .dB. Additional
robustness against higher-order reflections is achieved by
post-processing, as described in Sec. VI D.

extract the reflected signals, which were earlier localized as
described in Sec. IV B.
As mentioned before, there are three main challenges
for successful signal extraction: The reflected signals have
low SNR, low energy relative to the direct signal, and they
are correlated with the direct signal and each other.
Furthermore, the beamformer should also be robust to the
microphone self-noise and array errors so as to be applicable
in practice.
Data-dependent beamformers, such as EB-MVDR, can
provide high spatial selectivity and automatic null placement, which is important for extraction of the low-energy
reflected signals. However, in our scenario, the high correlation between the direct and reflected signals would cause
desired signal cancellation,32,34 i.e., the extracted signal
would suffer from significant distortion, thus making their
direct application impractical. In order to overcome this
problem, instead of applying the ill-conditioned PSD matrix
^ q aÞ in (6) at each frequency kq , q ¼ 1; …; Q, the same
Rðk
^ 0 aÞ is applied for all frequencies
smoothed PSD matrix Rðk
in the broadband EB-MVDR design. This ensures that a
well-conditioned PSD matrix is applied at all frequencies. A
robust design [similar to (10)], which is denoted as the
frequency-dependent EB-RMVDR design, is obtained by
solving
^ 0 aÞWðkq Þ
min WH ðkq ÞRðk

subject, to
WH ðkq ÞPðkq a; Xl Þ ¼

4p
; AWNG ðkq Þ  f;
M

(13)

where the beamformer coefficients Wðkq Þ are calculated for
each frequency kq , q ¼ 1; …; Q, while the same frequency
^ 0 aÞ is used across all frequencies. Please
smoothed PSD Rðk
note that for the beamformer used for DOA estimation
according to (10), the WNG constraint is applied at frequency k0 only and the beamformer coefficients are only
computed at this frequency.
^ 0 aÞ, the proBy using the smoothed PSD matrix Rðk
posed beamforming method is more robust to coherent signal processing,31,34 at the cost of signal extraction
performance, since the array weights are not optimum for all
frequencies but only for the reference frequency k0 .
B. Cross-correlation analysis

Having extracted all signals of interest, the TDOAs of
the reflected signals relative to the direct signal can be estimated using cross-correlation analysis, as indicated in
Fig. 3. In this step, for each source position j ¼ 1; …; J, the
cross-correlations (CCs) between the time-domain reference beamformer output signal uXj; 0 and all other beamformer outputs uX^ j; i are estimated. The reference signal uXj; 0
is extracted by steering the beamformer to the DOA of the
direct signal, Xj; 0 , which is assumed to be known a priori,
or alternatively the highest peak in the acoustic image is
selected as such. For all source positions j ¼ 1; …; J and
2778

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

CuXj; 0 ; uX^ ½kj; i  ¼
j; i

Kkj; i 1
1 X
uXj; 0 ½j þ kj; i uX^ j; i ½j;
K j¼0

(14)

where K is the length of extracted signals, kj; i is the lag
index, and j is the sample index. By searching for maxima
in cross-correlation functions (CCFs) CuXj; 0 ; uX^ , the TDOAs
j; i
of first-order reflections can be estimated according to
^s j; i ¼ kj; i; peak =fs , where fs is the sampling frequency and
kj; i; peak is the time lag of the highest positive peak in the
cross-correlation function excluding kj; i ¼ 0 and neighboring lags which correspond to the direct signal, i.e.,
kj; i; peak 62 ½bj; i ; bj; i ], where bj; i > 0 is a time lag threshold.
Setting bj; i is necessary because the direct signal, which typically has significantly more energy than the reflected signal,
may still be present in the output of the beamformer that is
steered toward the reflection, i.e., the beamformer may not
be able to suppress the direct signal completely and a significant peak may appear in the cross-correlation around the zeroth lag.
The value of bj; i can be determined adaptively by using
directly the corresponding cross-correlation function
CuXj; 0 ; uX^ . First, an envelope of the cross-correlation funcj; i
tion is computed by linearly interpolating the positive maxima of the CCF. Finally, the first minimum of the envelope
after the zeroth lag is chosen as bj; i . Note that the peak corresponding to the reflected signal in the cross-correlation function always has a positive lag value since the reflection has a
longer propagation path than the direct signal.
VI. BOUNDARY PARAMETER ESTIMATION

In order to infer the geometry of a room, the parameters
defining the room boundary planes need to be estimated.
Assuming the distance to the source dj; 0 and DOA of the
source Xj; 0 relative to the center of the microphone array are
known, the DOA and TDOA estimates of room reflections
can jointly be used to calculate the positions of image sources, and hence also the boundary plane parameters, by using
simple trigonometric relations. As mentioned earlier, specular wave reflection is assumed, where the angle of incidence
is equal to the angle of wave reflection. In addition, in order
to increase the robustness of the proposed technique, the use
of multiple spatially distributed source positions, with large
displacements, is recommended. For a room with a large
number of boundaries this becomes a necessity, i.e., the
number of source positions must increase with the number of
actual boundaries. A method for plane categorization is also
presented below.
A. Plane parameter estimation

For room geometry inference, the boundary plane parameters are sought for. In general, any plane Pðb; nÞ is
fully defined by a point that is lying on the plane b 2 R3 and
a vector normal to that plane n 2 R3 . Therefore, the aim
here is to find b and n. For this purpose, first the position of
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

Wðkq Þ

all localized reflections i ¼ 1; …; I, the crosscorrelations
are estimated by

the image source, the position of the boundary point, and
finally the vector normal to the plane are estimated.
The location of the center of the microphone array is
defined as ð0; 0; 0Þ in a Cartesian coordinate system and
transforming the known source position ðdj; 0 ; hj; 0 ; /j; 0 Þ
from the spherical coordinate system to the Cartesian coordinate system yields another point aj; 0 2 R3 in the Cartesian
coordinate system. For a given sound source position aj; 0 ,
and each localized reflection i ¼ 1; …; I, the estimated DOA
^ Þ and TDOA ^s j; i information is first used to estið^
h j; i ; /
j; i
mate the position of the corresponding image source
a^j; i 2 R3 . The image source is located at a distance dj; i; is
with a DOA Xj; i (see Fig. 4), where dj; i; is is estimated by
d^j; i; is ¼ c^s j; i þ dj; 0 ;

(15)

where dj; 0 is the direct-path distance from the source to the
array center. Combining this distance d^j; i; is with the DOA
^ Þ, an image source location in the spheriestimate ð^
h j; i ; /
j; i
^ Þ, which
cal coordinate system is obtained ðd^j; i; is ; ^h j; i ; /
j; i
after transformation to the Cartesian coordinate system is
denoted as a^j; i .
^ j; i is then comA vector normal to the boundary plane n
puted as
^ j; i ¼
n

aj; 0  a^j; i
:
kaj; 0  a^j; i k

(16)

d^j; i; rp ¼

2
dj;2 0  d^j; i; is

2½dj; 0 cosðHr Þ  d^j; i; is 

;

(17)

where Hr is the angular distance between two unit vectors
pointing to the DOA of the direct signal impinging from

B. Plane categorization

When a measurement is taken for one source position
only, a maximum of one plane estimate per boundary can be
found if it is assumed that only first-order reflections are
observable. However, in practice, several measurements for
different source positions j ¼ 1; …; J are required to reliably
infer all boundaries of an enclosure, which in turn results in
several plane estimates that correspond to the same boundary. Therefore, it is necessary to cluster the plane parameters
that approximate the same boundary, which is achieved here
using a plane categorization procedure.
This plane categorization procedure is based on comparing the unit normals of all estimated planes [i.e., for all ðj; iÞ
pairs] using the dot product metric G defined as
^ Tj; i  n
^ j0 ; i0 ;
Gðj; iÞ;ðj0 ; i0 Þ ¼ n

so that G 2 ½1; 1 is the cosine of the angle between the
^ j; i is the normal of the plane estinormals of the planes, and n
^ j0 ; i0 is
mated using source position j and reflection i, while n
the normal of the plane for source position j0 and reflection
i0 . If G is close to one, the angle between the normals of
these two planes is very small, i.e., the normal vectors point
nearly to the same direction. Lower values represent a larger
angular deviation between the plane normals.
As a first step in plane categorization, the dot product is
calculated between all pairs of estimated plane normal vectors, which results in a square and symmetric L  L correlation matrix G
G ¼ ðg1 ; g2 ; …; gL Þ ¼ ðgl Þl2f1…Lg ;

FIG. 4. Plane parameter estimation.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

(18)

(19)

where gl denotes the lth column vector with elements given
as Gl; l0 from (18), l0 ¼ 1; …; L, l ¼ 1; …; L, and L is the
total number of ðj; iÞ pairs. In the special case when the
number of localized reflections I is the same for all J source
positions, then L ¼ IJ.
Second, the estimated planes corresponding to the same
boundary are sought. For that purpose, a binary masking of
all dot products Gl; l0 is performed such that the new L  L
~ is obtained, with its elements given by
matrix G
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2779

01 September 2026 16:58:16

^ j; i , i.e.,
Finally, the position of the observed boundary point b
the point of reflection (see Fig. 4), is found by transforming
^ Þ to Cartesian coordinates, where
h j; i ; /
the point ðd^j; i; rp ; ^
j; i
^
d j; i; rp is the distance from the microphone array to the reflection point. d^j; i; rp can be estimated by solving the following
trigonometric equation19

ðhj; 0 ; /j; 0 Þ and the DOA of the reflection impinging from
^ Þ, respectively.
ð^h j; i ; /
j; i
For a given source position, this procedure is repeated
for each reflection i ¼ 1; …; I, thus allowing to find a set of
I boundary plane estimates, which correspond to the number
of first-order reflections. Theoretically, all the enclosure
boundaries can be obtained from one measurement if accurate reflection DOA and TDOA information is obtained for
all boundaries. However, in practice, this is typically not the
case due to the influence of the directivity of the source and
the array, low values of the reflection coefficients, and the
presence of background noise. Therefore, when only one
array is available for measurements, several source positions
should typically be used, J > 1, to allow for a robust 3D geometry inference (see results with respect to different number of source positions presented in Sec. VII C).

G~ l; l0 ¼



1
0

if
if

Gl; l0 > c
Gl; l0  c;

(20)

where c is a threshold that is chosen close to unity. This
means the masked dot product is set to unity if given two
planes are considered estimates of the same boundary, while
dot products for all other planes (that belong to different
boundaries) are set to zero.
Finally, in order to group the estimated planes into sets,
where each plane in the set is an estimate of the same room
~ that fulfill
boundary, all columns gl0 from G
9l 2 f1; :::; l0  1g : gl0 Ɐ gl

(21)

are removed, where Ɐ is a component-wise inequality (i.e.,
in the sense of a partially ordered set, Ref. 35). As a result of
~
such grouping, each column of the resulting matrix G
defines a set of planes that estimate the same boundary (for
examples, see Sec. VII).
C. Room geometry inference

^ i  bÞ
 ¼ 0g
^ i 2 R3 j n
 T ðb
P ¼ fb

(22)

is the least-squares best-fit plane with respect to the vectors
^1; b
^ 2 ; …; b
^ K , where b
 is the approximated boundary point,
b
the position of which can be calculated from an arithmetic
mean as
R
X
¼1
^i:
b
b
(23)
R i¼1
It can be shown20 that the solution to the above problem
can be found as a normalized eigenvector of the smallest
eigenvalue of the covariance matrix H 2 R33 with its elements given by
HðtÞ ¼

R 
 ðÞ

1X
 ðtÞ b
 ðÞ ;
^ ðtÞ  b
^ b
b
i
i
R i¼1

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Evaluation measures

For comparison of estimated and “ground truth”
boundary parameters, where the “ground truth” plane
^ ðb;
^ n
^ Þ are both defined
Pðb; nÞ and the estimated plane P
by the normal vector and the boundary point, the following
measures are applied: Since any plane is fully defined by
the perpendicular distance from the plane to the origin of
the coordinate system and a normal vector, a combination
of measures for these two plane parameters can be used to
unambiguously compare the positions of planes. The first
metric is defined as the difference DP; P^ ¼ DP  DP^
between the distance DP of the “ground truth” plane P to
^ to
the origin and the distance DP^ of the estimated plane P
the origin in centimeters, while the second metric measures
the angle between both planes and is defined as the dot
product of their normals, i.e.,
^ Þ:
Hn; n^ ¼ arccosðnT  n

(25)

Assuming a room with B boundaries, the average distance and orientation deviations for all estimated boundaries
are given by

(24)

where the row and column indices are t ¼ 1; 2; 3 and
 n
 Þ is
 ¼ 1; 2; 3. Thus finally the boundary plane Pðb;
obtained as a least-squares approximation to R boundary
points.
2780

For rooms that have boundaries with typical values for
the reflection coefficients, the number of planes estimated
according to Secs. VI A–C does not exceed the number of
actual boundaries. However, if many room boundaries have
very high reflection coefficient values, such as is the case for
walls made of glass, there might be many high peaks in the
acoustic image, some of which corresponding to higherorder reflections. This in turn can lead to the number of estimated planes being greater than the number of actual boundaries (whose number is assumed to be known).
This problem may be remedied by an additional, final
postprocessing step. If the number of estimated boundary
planes is greater than the number of actual boundaries, the
normals of all the estimated planes are compared and planes
with similar orientation are grouped together. From each
group, a plane which was estimated using the largest number
of boundary points R is selected as a boundary estimate, i.e.,
all other planes are discarded. Here it is assumed that the
probability that plane estimates due to higher-order reflections (the few which have sufficient energy to be accurately
localized and extracted) for different source positions coincide in orientation is low, whereas plane estimates for firstorder reflections from the same wall do coincide. As an outlook, the classification of the reflection order, e.g., as
described in Ref. 36, could also be incorporated to discard
planes due to higher-order reflections.

B
1X
jDP v  DP^ v j;
D P; P^ ¼
B v¼1

(26)

B
X
 n; n^ ¼ 1
Hn ; n^ ;
H
B v¼1 v v

(27)

Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

Having identified the number of boundaries and having
assigned each estimated plane to the corresponding boundary, the inference of boundary parameters can be performed.
In this last step, geometrical inference is performed either by
taking the plane parameters directly if only a single plane is
assigned to the given boundary or by calculating the boundary plane as a least-squares approximation for the estimated
positions of the boundary points that correspond to the same
boundary (if the group consists of several plane estimates).
The resulting least-squares problem can be formulated
as follows. Let us first define an estimated boundary point
^ 2 R3 as a column vector ½b^ð1Þ ; b^ð2Þ ; b^ð3Þ T , and consider
b
R > 1 boundary points that belong to the same boundary,
^ 2 ; …; b
^ R 2 R3 . The goal is to determine the
^1; b
given as b
 2 R3 such that
normal vector n

D. Post-processing for highly reflective boundaries

respectively. Another informative measure about the similarity of both room geometries is the relative volume error that is
given by CV^ ; V ¼ 100ð1  V^ =VÞ½%, where V^ and V are the
estimated and “ground truth” room volumes, respectively.
B. Experimental setup

R

R

C. Results for simulated room

To evaluate the performance of the inference method for
different parameter settings, a simulation software based on
the image-source method27 was applied to generate the microphone signals. First the microphone signals for four source

FIG. 5. Experimental setup.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2781

01 September 2026 16:58:16

To verify the effectiveness and quantify the accuracy of
the proposed room inference method, its performance with
both simulations and real measurements is evaluated. Both
stationary white Gaussian noise and speech were used as
source signals in the experiments. In order to objectively
compare the accuracy of the inference method in different
scenarios, the results for the stationary white Gaussian noise
(WGN) are shown for most cases. The use of a WGN as a
source signal ensured that room modes across all frequencies
were sufficiently excited. Note that in experiments with
speech signals, the DOAs are only estimated during periods
of speech activity, as estimation during speech-absence periods would degrade the estimation performance. For voice activity detection, a simple wideband energy-based voice
activity detector (VAD) is used, which operates as an energy
detector applied to a reference microphone signal, see
Ref. 37 for an overview of various VAD methods.
The microphone signals, with a duration of 5 s, were
simulated or recorded, depending on the experiment, at a
sampling rate of 44.1 kHz and then processed offline. Q ¼
1024 equally spaced frequency bins, each with a width of
approximately 43 Hz, were used. Note that there are no
restrictions on the order of reflections in simulated RIRs, and
the RIR filter length was set such that it corresponded to the
reverberation time T60 .22 Unless stated otherwise, a frequency smoothing range of 1.3–4.5 kHz (i.e., ka 2 ½1; 3:5)
was used and the focusing (reference) frequency was set to
4.5 kHz. This relatively narrow frequency smoothing range
was chosen for good performance in terms of spatial selectivity of the beamformers on the one hand and to avoid poor

SNR and spatial aliasing issues on the other hand,17 thus
allowing for accurate DOA and TDOA estimation. The
WNG was set to f ¼ 1:148, corresponding to 0.6 dB, in order
to ensure the robustness of the EB-RMVDR beamformer.
The angular difference between the look directions of two
neighboring beams for DOA estimation was set to 18 both
along azimuth and elevation, corresponding to an angular resolution of 18 for DOA estimation.
The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. 5. The room
represents a real shoe box-like lecture room, with a reverberation time T60 of about 900 ms, which has been used for real
measurements, but its dimensions were also taken for simulations where the pillars have been neglected. The “ground
truth” planes P 5 and P 6 correspond to the floor and ceiling,
respectively, and the height of the room is 3.03 m. Note that
the inference results for the real room were compared to the
“ground truth” obtained through manual measurements of
the respective distances, and thus can be considered accurate
up to manual measurement errors.
Unless stated otherwise, the spherical array used for the
measurements is the EigenmikeV,21 which has a radius of
0.042 m and consists of 32 well-calibrated high-quality
microphones placed on a rigid sphere. It can decompose the
sound field for up to fourth-order spherical harmonics
ðN ¼ 4Þ. The source signal was reproduced via a loudspeaker with a diaphragm diameter of 0.08 m. On the other
hand, in room-acoustic simulations, an omnidirectional
source was simulated, and microphone arrays of exactly the
same geometry as the EigenmikeV was used. Both open and
rigid sphere arrays were simulated.

positions were generated, according to the room setup depicted
in Fig. 5. Unless stated otherwise, white Gaussian noise was
used as a source signal in the presented experiments.
1. DOA and TDOA estimation

FIG. 6. (Color online) Simulations using a noise source with a loudspeaker
at position ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ; (a) Acoustic image with circles indicating the
“ground truth” DOAs of five reflections; (b) Cross-correlation between the
extracted direct signal and a reflection from the ceiling; (c) Zoomed-in
cross-correlation.
2782

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

FIG. 7. (Color online) Simulations using a speech source with a loudspeaker
at position ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ; (a) Acoustic image with circles indicating the
“ground truth” DOAs of five reflections; (b) Cross-correlation between the
extracted direct signal and a reflection from the ceiling; (c) Zoomed-in
cross-correlation.

particular, the former typically cannot be completely suppressed, and it is pronounced around the zeroth lag. In order
to find the parameter b (see Sec. V for explanation), the envelope of the cross-correlation is computed and the lag corresponding to the first minimum is chosen as b value. Figures
6(c) and 7(c) show the zoomed-in cross-correlations around
the zeroth time lag, the corresponding cross-correlation envelopes, and the location of the time lag thresholds for noise and
speech sources are b1;2 ¼ 69 and b1;2 ¼ 68, respectively.
Note that the peaks corresponding to the reflected signal,
which are highlighted by the arrow in Figs. 6(b) and 7(b), are
the highest in these examples and hence the parameter b has
no effect on the results. However, this is not always the case,
especially in real acoustic scenarios (see Sec. VII D) where
the highest peak may be found around time lag zero due to
imperfect original source suppression.
An objective measure of the DOA accuracy, the angular
deviation from the “ground truth,” Hdev , was computed as
^
Hdev ¼ arccos½cos hcos ^h þ sin hsin ^hcosð/  /Þ.
Table I
presents the “ground truth” and estimated DOAs and
TDOAs for a noise and speech source positioned at
ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ. Note that the DOA estimates are
arranged in order of decreasing estimated power from the
acoustic maps. In general, good DOA estimates are obtained.
However, the DOA deviation measure, Hdev , clearly shows
that with decreasing peak power, the accuracy of the DOA
estimates also degrades (see Ref. 17 for a comprehensive
discussion on reflection DOA estimation). Although the
evaluation in Ref. 17 was restricted to white Gaussian noise
source signals, the majority of the results here show that
there is no significant degradation in accuracy when using a
speech source. The TDOA estimates for both noise and
speech sources are very accurate, which confirms that the
beamformer design presented in Sec. V A is well suited for
correlated signal extraction.
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

For insight into the DOA estimation, exemplary acoustic
images of a room for a noise source and a speech source
positioned at ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ are depicted in Figs. 6(a)
and 7(a), respectively. For TDOA estimation, exemplary
cross-correlations of extracted noise and speech source signals are shown in Figs. 6(b) and 7(b), respectively. An SNR
of 30 dB (for a speech source, this is the SNR only during
speech activity) and a reflection coefficient value of a ¼ 0:7
(for all boundaries) were chosen.
Out of all peaks found in the acoustic images, only those
peaks were selected for further processing which exceeded
the noise floor by . ¼ jminf10log10 ½Zðk0 ; XÞg=3 j dB (see
Sec. IV B), i.e., only those peaks lying in the upper twothirds of the acoustic image power range. This value of .
was found heuristically to be a good compromise as to allow
accurate DOA estimates (and thus accurate room inference)
and provide a sufficiently large number of estimated boundaries per measurement. For both noise and speech sources,
five peaks were selected corresponding to five estimated
reflection DOAs. The diamond and circles in Figs. 6(a) and
7(a) highlight the locations of the “ground truth” direct-path
and reflection DOAs, respectively. The estimated DOAs are
used for steering the beamformers for signal extraction and
subsequently for the image point estimation.
Figures 6(b) and 7(b) depict the cross-correlations
between the extracted direct signal and a reflected signal originating from the ceiling. It can be seen that the crosscorrelations have several distinct peaks that correspond to the
TDOAs of the direct signal and early room reflections. In

TABLE I. “Ground truth” and estimated DOAs, in degrees, TDOAs, in
milliseconds, arranged in decreasing order of the output power in the acoustic image, for simulated room.
DOAs
X
ð92; 0Þ
ð135; 0Þ
ð44; 0Þ
ð91; 298Þ
ð91; 71Þ
ð90; 180Þ
a

TABLE II. Orientation deviations Hn; n^ , in degrees, and distance deviations
DP; P^ , in centimeters, for different number of source positions in simulated
room (SNR ¼ 30dB). Averages and relative volume errors are also
provided.

TDOAs
J¼1

^ na
X

^ sb
X

Hdevn

Hdevs

s

^s n

^s s

ð91; 359Þ
ð137; 0Þ
ð41; 0Þ
ð93; 295Þ
ð95; 75Þ
ð90; 186Þ

ð91; 359Þ
ð139; 0Þ
ð39; 1Þ
ð94; 297Þ
ð105; 66Þ
ð91; 184Þ

1.4
2.0
3.0
3.6
5.7
6.0

1.4
4.0
5.0
3.2
14.8
4.1

3.6
3.9
9.8
18.0
24.4

3.6
3.9
9.9
18.0
24.4

3.6
3.9
9.9
18.0
24.4

Subscript “n” denotes noise.
Subscript “s” denotes speech.

Next, the results for a varied number of source positions
are presented in Fig. 8 and Table II. An SNR of 30 dB and a
reflection coefficient a ¼ 0:7 (for all boundaries) were chosen. For illustration of the plane categorization presented in
Sec. VI B, Fig. 8 depicts the results for J ¼ 4, where the 21

J¼3

J¼4

Plane

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

–
4.6
6.1
3.9
2.0
2.5
3.8

–
1.01
11.33
3.41
4.81
3.17
4.75

4.8
2.9
6.1
2.7
2.0
2.6
3.5

8.18
3.83
11.33
0.92
4.81
3.87
5.49

2.6
2.9
3.8
1.6
0.2
0.1
1.8

0.87
3.83
7.79
0.56
0.20
1.97
2.54

1.9
2.7
3.3
1.6
0.2
0.2
1.6

0.93
4.33
1.33
0.56
0.16
1.82
1.52

b

2. Number of source positions

J¼2

CV^ ; V



1:51%

1:52%

0:35%

3. Signal-to-noise ratio

FIG. 8. (Color online) Plane categorization results for J ¼ 4 and
SNR ¼ 30 dB in simulated room; (a) Dot products between vectors normal
to planes according to Gl; l0 (18); (b) Binary masking according to G~ l; l0 (20);
(c) Assignment of planes to room boundaries according to (21).
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Room inference performance is also evaluated as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A fixed number of
sources J ¼ 4 and the same reflection coefficient value of a ¼
0:7 are used. Table III presents the inference results for different SNRs. For an SNR of 10 dB, five of the possible six room
boundaries are estimated. Furthermore, one of the estimated
boundaries deviates strongly from “ground truth.” Increasing
the SNR to 20 dB and 30 dB, results in all boundaries being
estimated successfully. The average distance and orientation
deviations decrease with increasing SNR thus increasing the
accuracy of volume estimates. The estimated volume for
SNRs of 20 dB and 30 dB are 231:39 m3 and 228.53 m3,
respectively. Figure 9 illustrates the reference and estimated
room boundaries, with thick solid lines and thin dashed lines,
respectively, for an SNR of 30 dB. As can be seen, the proposed method infers the geometry rather correctly, the largest
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2783

01 September 2026 16:58:16

estimated planes are assigned to 6 boundaries, e.g., the four
reflections assigned to boundary 5 in Fig. 8(c) are obtained
from column 5 in Fig. 8(b), and columns 9, 10, and 19 are
discarded [see (21)].
When only one source position is used, at
ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ, five of the six possible room boundaries
are estimated, i.e., it is not possible to estimate all walls, as
shown in Table II. In this case, estimating the position of the
boundary P 1 is extremely difficult as the angular distance
between the reflection on the boundary and the direct path
seen by the array is too small so that the spatial resolution of
the beamformer does not suffice to discriminate them sufficiently well. The average distance and orientation deviations,
according to Eqs. (26) and (27), respectively, are also shown
in Table II. Except for J ¼ 1, where one boundary is not
found, the averaged deviations become smaller with an
increasing number of source positions. Additionally, the
inferred geometry can be used to calculate the room volume
and compare it with the “ground truth” volume of 229:32 m3
of the simulated room (disregarding the pillars). The estimated
volumes for J ¼ 2, J ¼ 3, and J ¼ 4 are 225:85 m3 ,
225:83 m3 , and 228:53 m3 , respectively. The accuracy in volume estimation increases with the number of sources. The corresponding relative volume errors are presented in Table II.

TABLE IV. Orientation and distance deviations, Hn; n^ and Dp;^p , for different reflection coefficients in simulated room (J ¼ 4 and SNR ¼ 30 dB).
a ¼ 0:5

a ¼ 0:9

Hn; n^

Dp;^p

Hn; n^

Dp;^p

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

Dp;^p

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

1.0
1.3
3.2
8.9
0.6
0.6
2.6

0.06
0.20
0.09
1.33
0.90
1.07
0.61

1.2
0.6
2.9
4.3
0.5
0.7
1.7

0.11
0.69
0.44
0.75
0.73
1.02
0.62

3.0
3.2
4.9
1.6
0.4
0.1
2.2

0.88
4.56
2.61
0.30
0.45
1.71
1.75

4.4
6.7
11.0
11.9
0.2
1.0
5.8

0.88
1.13
2.15
8.46
0.09
0.12
2.14

1:20%

0:81%

0:38%

2:94%

0:7 are shown in Table III), indicating that all room boundaries are estimated successfully, as confirmed by the average
orientation and distance deviations. For a very high reflection
coefficient value of a ¼ 0:9, which corresponds to highly reflective surfaces such as wood paneling, the average deviations start to increase. This is because very high reflection
coefficients result in many spurious planes resulting from
higher-order reflections. Although postprocessing (see Sec.
VI D) does eliminate the majority of the planes resulting from
higher-order reflections, one could discard the remaining
planes by using the method proposed in Ref. 36.
5. Large array

The performance of the proposed technique was also
evaluated for different reflection coefficient values. In all simulations, the reflection coefficient value was kept constant for
all boundaries and an SNR of 30 dB was used for four source
positions. The results for the reflection coefficient values of
a ¼ 0:5; 0:6; 0:8; 0:9 are shown in Table IV (results for a ¼

The results shown so far indicate that the proposed
method leads to a successful inference of the room geometry
with relatively high accuracy. It should also be noted that the
errors in boundary plane estimation are mainly due to the
errors in the DOA estimation, which substantially influence
the orientation of the boundaries and may cause a disproportionate error in DP; P^ . Since the presented DOA estimation is
based on optimum array processing, a significant improvement can be expected when increasing the size of the array.
To this end, the proposed method was evaluated with a simulated spherical array consisting of 240 microphones with a
radius of 0.111 m.38 A frequency smoothing range of 1:5 
4:9 kHz (i.e., ka 2 ½3; 10) was used and the focusing frequency was set to 4:9 kHz (i.e., k0 a ¼ 10). The order was set
to N ¼ 10. Table V depicts the results obtained using the

TABLE III. Orientation and distance deviations, Hn; n^ and DP; P^ , for different SNRs in simulated room (J ¼ 4 and a ¼ 0:7).

TABLE V. Orientation and distance deviations, Hn; n^ and DP; P^ , for different arrays in simulated room.

4. Reflection coefficients

SNR ¼ 10 dB

SNR ¼ 20 dB

SNR ¼ 30 dB

Small array

Large array

Plane

Hn; n^

Dp;^p

Hn; n^

Dp;^p

Hn; n^

Dp;^p

Plane

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

–
11.1
3.7
14.1
0.7
0.8
6.1

–
15.33
5.36
3.48
1.27
0.10
5.11

2.5
2.7
0.4
5.7
0.3
0.2
1.9

0.87
6.73
2.84
0.79
0.43
1.80
2.24

1.9
2.7
3.3
1.6
0.2
0.2
1.6

0.93
4.33
1.33
0.56
0.16
1.82
1.52

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

1.9
2.7
3.3
1.6
0.2
0.32
1.6

0.93
4.33
1.33
0.56
0.16
1.82
1.52

0.5
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.9
0.7
0.6

0.37
1.62
2.84
1.68
0
1.77
1.38

CV^ ; V

2784

–

0:90%

0:35%

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

CV^ ; V

0:35%

1:43%

Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

deviations appearing at the room corners, which is caused by
tilting of the estimated planes relative to the reflection points
that are located close to the boundary centers. This could be
further reduced by taking more measurements.
Although the detailed results are not shown here, the average deviations for the case without any noise, i.e.,
 n; n^ Þ ¼ ð2:20; 3:678Þ. In general, an
SNR ¼ 1, are ðD P; P^ ; H
increase in the SNR leads to a larger number of estimated
boundaries per source position thus leading to good estimates. It should be noted that an increase in SNR can also
lead to the estimation of spurious planes resulting from
higher-order reflections, which in turn can result in the number of estimated boundary planes being greater than the
number of actual boundaries. However, by applying the
post-processing presented in Sec. VI, the estimation of all
six room boundaries was successfully performed.

a ¼ 0:8

Plane

CV^ ; V

FIG. 9. (Color online) Reference (solid lines) and estimated (dashed lines)
room boundaries for simulated room with J ¼ 4 and an SNR of 30 dB using
noise.

a ¼ 0:6

TABLE VI. Orientation and distance deviations, Hn; n^ and DP; P^ , for noise
and speech sources in simulated room (J ¼ 4 and SNR ¼ 30 dB).
Noise
Plane

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

1.9
2.7
3.3
1.6
0.2
0.2
1.6

0.93
4.33
1.33
0.56
0.16
1.82
1.52

3.2
2.0
3.0
4.5
1.0
0.6
2.4

1.11
0.79
2.16
0.97
1.03
0.41
1.08

CV^ ; V

FIG. 10. (Color online) Reference (solid lines) and estimated (dashed lines) room
boundaries for simulated room with J ¼ 4 and an SNR of 30 dB using a large array.

6. Speech sources

Table VI presents the results obtained using a male
speech signal as a source with SNR ¼ 30 dB and a ¼ 0:7; the
results for the noise are repeated here for the convenience of

FIG. 11. (Color online) Reference (solid lines) and estimated (dashed lines)
room boundaries for simulated room with J ¼ 4 and an SNR of 30 dB using
speech.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

0:35%

1:36%

comparison. As can be observed, the inference method works
successfully with speech. There is a slight degradation in the
 n; n^ Þ ¼ ð1:08; 2:48Þ, in
DOA estimation accuracy, ðD P; P^ ; H
comparison to the results for the white Gaussian noise.
However, an accurate inference of the boundary planes is still
obtained, as depicted in Fig. 11. The estimated volume is
232:43 m3 (the reference volume is 229:32 m3 ), which yields
a relative volume error of only 1:36%.
7. Rigid sphere

Table VII presents the results obtained when using a
rigid sphere in the simulation.39 The source is a noise signal
with SNR ¼ 30 dB and a ¼ 0:7; the results for the open
sphere are repeated here for the convenience of comparison.
As expected, the inference method works successfully with
rigid spheres as well. An accurate inference of the boundary
planes is still obtained, as depicted in Fig. 12. The estimated
volume is 231:08 m3 (the reference volume is 229:32 m3 ),
which yields a relative volume error of only 0:77%.
D. Experiments in a real room

In this section, the proposed method is evaluated via
measurements in a real mid-sized lecture room as depicted
in Fig. 5. An SNR of 12 dB was measured at the

FIG. 12. (Color online) Reference (solid lines) and estimated (dashed lines)
room boundaries for simulated room with J ¼ 4 and an SNR of 30dB using
a rigid sphere.
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2785

01 September 2026 16:58:16

same room setup as before, with SNR ¼ 30 dB and a ¼ 0:7;
the results for the 32-element array are repeated here for the
convenience of comparison. As expected, there is a significant improvement in the DOA estimation accuracy,
 n; n^ Þ ¼ ð1:5; 0:58Þ, which in turn leads to a very
ðD P; P^ ; H
accurate inference of the boundary planes, as depicted in
Fig. 10. In this case the estimated volume is 232:25 m3 (the
reference volume is 229:32 m3 ), which yields a relative volume error of only 1:43% but is larger than 0:35% obtained
using the small array where the larger individual errors of
the boundary estimates average out. In Fig. 10, the reference
and estimated room boundaries, with thick solid lines and
thin dashed lines, respectively, are depicted. The room geometry is estimated very accurately in this case.

Speech

TABLE VII. Orientation and distance deviations, Hn; n^ and DP; P^ , for open
and rigid sphere for noise sources in simulated room (J ¼ 4 and SNR ¼
30 dB).
Open

Rigid

Plane

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

1.9
2.7
3.3
1.6
0.2
0.2
1.6

0.93
4.33
1.33
0.56
0.16
1.82
1.52

2.7
2.9
2.6
2.8
1.0
0.6
2.1

1.16
1.70
0.34
0.92
1.01
1.31
1.07

CV^ ; V

0:35%

0:77%

FIG. 14. (Color online) Measurements of speech in real room with a loudspeaker at position ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ; (a) Acoustic image with circles indicating the “ground truth” DOAs of three reflections; (b) Cross-correlation
between the extracted direct signal and a reflection from the opposite wall.
(c) Zoomed-in cross-correlation.

the direct and reflected signals. In order to set the parameter
b, the envelope of the cross-correlation is computed and the
lag corresponding to the first minimum is used, which yields
b1;2 ¼ 29, as depicted in Fig. 13(c), where the zoomed-in
cross-correlation, corresponding envelope, and location of
time lag threshold are shown. In this case the application of
the threshold is crucial as the highest peak in the crosscorrelation occurs around the zeroth time lag, which is due
to the relatively high residual of the direct signal in the
extracted reflection. The peak corresponding to the reflection
is highlighted by the arrow in Fig. 13(b). Figure 14(b) clearly
shows the challenge encountered when computing the crosscorrelations for a speech signal, especially at such low
SNRs. Although the highest peak does correspond to the correct TDOA and the direct signal is attenuated significantly,
as confirmed by the absence of a significant peak at the zeroth lag, another strong peak is also present which corresponds to the ceiling reflection. This problem may be
alleviated by using a larger array.
Table VIII presents the “ground truth” and estimated
DOAs and TDOAs for a noise and speech source positioned
at ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ. In this case, four DOAs and three

TABLE VIII. “Ground truth” and estimated DOAs, in degrees, and TDOAs,
in milliseconds, for measurements in a real room.
DOAs
X

FIG. 13. (Color online) Measurements of noise in real room with a loudspeaker at position ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ; (a) Acoustic image with circles indicating the “ground truth” DOAs of three reflections; (b) Cross-correlation
between the extracted direct signal and a reflection from the ceiling. (c)
Zoomed-in cross-correlation.
2786

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

^n
X

TDOAs

^s
X

ð92; 0Þ
ð92; 359Þ ð92; 359Þ
ð90; 180Þ ð93; 184Þ ð90; 183Þ
ð135; 0Þ
ð136; 0Þ ð137; 359Þ
ð44; 0Þ
ð41; 0Þ
ð46; 1Þ
a

^s n

a
^s das
s

Hdevn

Hdevs

s

1.0
5.0
1.0
3.0

1.0
3.0
2.1
2.1





24.4 24.4 24.4 24.4
3.6 3.6 3.6 3.6
3.9 3.8 3.8 0.9

^s s

Superscript “das” denotes the EB-DAS Beamformer
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

microphones and the atmospheric temperature was 22.8 C
during the measurements. The same algorithmic parameters
as presented in Sec. VII B were used here. Similar to the simulation results, exemplary acoustic images and crosscorrelations for a noise and speech source signal played back
via a loudspeaker positioned at ð3:44; 4:33; 1:44Þ are
depicted in Figs. 13 and 14, respectively, to be compared
with Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. Several distinct peaks in the
acoustic images were found, from which four peaks (denoted
with a diamond and three circles) were selected as
reliable DOA estimates, representing peaks that are at least
. ¼ jminf10log10 ½Zðk0 ; XÞg=3jdB (same as for the simulations) above the noise floor.
Figures 13(b) and 14(b) depict the cross-correlation
between the extracted direct noise and speech signal, respectively, and a reflected signal originating from the opposite
wall ð938; 1848Þ. As before, for a noise source the crosscorrelation exhibits several distinct peaks corresponding to

TABLE IX. Orientation and distance deviations, Hn; n^ and DP; P^ , for measurements using noise and speech sources in real room (J ¼ 4 and SNR ¼
15 dB).
Noise

Speech

Plane

Hn; n^

DP; P^

Hn; n^

DP; P^

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Ave.

2.6
3.6
2.2
3.5
1.3
1.4
2.4

0.79
0.56
2.09
0.33
0.28
2.20
1.04

2.5
2.2
2.9
5.1
3.2
2.8
3.2

0.06
0.48
2.52
0.10
3.71
1.80
1.44

CV^ ; V

0:23%

0:21%

FIG. 15. (Color online) Reference (solid lines) and estimated (dashed lines)
room boundaries for real room with J ¼ 4 and an SNR of 12 dB using noise.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

FIG. 16. (Color online) Reference (solid lines) and estimated (dashed lines)
room boundaries for real room with J ¼ 4 and an SNR of 12 dB using speech.

estimate for measured signals is in general comparable to
that obtained using simulated signals. Similarly to the simulation results, the largest deviations are mainly pronounced
at the boundary corners and edges. The reference volume
amounts to 229:32 m3 , and the estimated volume is
229:85 m3 and 229:80 m3 for noise and speech, respectively.
Thus the corresponding relative volume errors for noise and
speech are only 0:23% and 0:21%, respectively.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS

A novel beamformer-based technique for room geometry inference has been proposed, which is based on the playback and capture of acoustic signals in an acoustic enclosure
using a compact off-the-shelf microphone array. The proposed technique has a decisive advantage over conventional
inference methods found in the literature in that it does not
involve measuring RIRs, and the only a priori information
required being the relative position of the sources to the
array and the array geometry.
For 3D room inference, beamformer-based processing
using a spherical microphone array in the EB domain is
applied. Acoustic images of rooms obtained from steered
EB-RMVDR beamformers with frequency smoothing are
successfully applied to accurately estimate the DOAs of
reflected signals. Cross-correlation analysis of reflection signals extracted by frequency-dependent EB-RMVDR beamformers with frequency smoothing and steered to the
estimated DOAs facilitate the estimation of TDOAs. Finally,
the obtained DOA and TDOA information is combined to
estimate boundary plane parameters using geometric relations. For robust performance in real acoustic scenarios, the
use of multiple source positions is proposed and evaluated,
and a suitable technique for combining and postprocessing
the results of such measurements (referred to as plane categorization) has been verified.
Experimental results of both simulations and real measurements, using both noise and speech source signals, reflection coefficient values, and input SNRs, confirm the high
accuracy of the presented method. The positions of the walls,
Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2787

01 September 2026 16:58:16

TDOAs are compared, i.e., three reflections can be localized.
Similarly to the analogous simulation results, the DOA deviation increases with decreasing peak power while the TDOA
estimates remain very accurate. Additionally, the TDOAs
obtained when using an eigenbeam delay-and-sum17 (EBDAS) beamformer for signal extraction are shown. Although
the first two TDOAs are accurately estimated, the last
TDOA, which is estimated from the reflection with the lowest power, is wrong. Such TDOA errors lead to erroneous
room inference results. This confirms the superiority of the
EB-RMVDR over the EB-DAS, for TDOA estimation, in
adverse acoustic conditions. Table IX presents the overall
results of the real room inference using J ¼ 4 noise and
speech sources, which indicate that all room boundaries are
inferred successfully. Small average deviations of ðD P; P^ ;
 n; n^ Þ ¼ ð1:04; 2:48 Þ and ðD ^ ; H
 n; n^ Þ¼ð1:44; 3:28 Þ, respecH
P; P
tively, clearly confirm the applicability of the proposed
method to 3D geometry inference in real rooms.
Figures 15 and 16, respectively, depict the reference and
estimated room boundaries (denoted with thick solid lines
and thin dashed lines, respectively) using noise and speech
source signals. Note that there is only a marginal degradation
in performance for speech, and that the room geometry

even in large acoustic enclosures, are estimated precisely up
to a few centimeters only. Furthermore, several methods for
improving robustness of the estimation have been presented,
which allow for fully automatic inference even in highly
challenging acoustic scenarios. Finally, the method is also
directly applicable to room volume estimation, with an estimation accuracy error of 2% or less.
The room inference method presented here is restricted
to rooms with walls that are piecewise planar and whose
overall geometry is convex due to the boundary parameter
estimation procedure that is used, i.e., it is restricted to finding planes. Extension to other types of boundaries, e.g.,
curved boundaries, might be accomplished by using sufficiently many source positions and alternative boundary estimation procedures, e.g., point clustering.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the Future and
Emerging Technologies (FET) program within the Seventh
Framework Programme for Research of the European
Commission, under FET-Open Grant No. 226007 SCENIC
and by the QUEVIRCO project, financed by the Research
Council of Norway, Cisco Systems, and Statoil AS.

1

2788

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

01 September 2026 16:58:16

F. Antonacci, A. Sarti, and S. Tubaro, “Geometric reconstruction of the
environment from its response to multiple acoustic emissions,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2010), pp.
2822–2825.
2
B. G€unel, “Room shape and size estimation using directional impulse
response measurements,” in Proceedings of the Forum Acusticum Sevilla
(Sevilla, Spain, 2002), pp. 1–7.
3
P. Annibale and R. Rabenstein, “Acoustic source localization and speed
estimation based on time-differences-of-arrival under temperature variations,” in Proceedings of the European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO) (Aalborg, Denmark, 2010), pp. 721–725.
4
M. Kuster, “Reliability of estimating the room volume from a single room
impulse response,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 124, 982–993 (2008).
5
F. Ribeiro, C. Zhang, D. Florencio, and D. Ba, “Using reverberation to
improve range and elevation discrimination for small array sound source
localization,” IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Processing 18,
1781–1792 (2010).
6
Y. Peled and B. Rafaely, “Method for dereverberation and noise reduction
using spherical microphone arrays,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2010), pp. 113–116.
7
H. Sun, S. Yan, and U. P. Svensson, “Space domain optimal beamforming
for spherical microphone arrays,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2010), pp. 117–120.
8
A. O’Donovan, R. Duraiswami, and D. Zotkin, “Automatic matched filter
recovery via the audio camera,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE,
New York, 2010), pp. 2826–2829.
9
T. Betlehem and T. Abhayapala, “Theory and design of sound field reproduction in reverberant rooms,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 117, 2100–2111
(2005).
10
M. Kuster, D. de Vries, E. Hulsebos, and A. Gisolf, “Acoustic imaging in
enclosed spaces: Analysis of room geometry modifications on the impulse
response,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 116, 2126–2137 (2004).
11
D. Ba, F. Ribeiro, C. Zhang, and D. Florencio, “L1 regularized room modeling with compact microphone arrays,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2010), pp. 157–160.
12
J. Filos, A. Canclini, M. Thomas, F. Antonacci, A. Sarti, and P. Naylor,
“Robust inference of room geometry from acoustic measurements using

the Hough transform,” in Proceedings of the European Signal Processing
Conference (EUSIPCO) (Barcelona, Spain, 2011), pp. 161–165.
13
F. Antonacci, J. Filos, M. Thomas, E. Habets, A. Sarti, P. Naylor, and S.
Tubaro, “Inference of room geometry from acoustic impulse responses,”
IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Processing 20, 2683–2695 (2012).
14
S. Tervo and T. Tossavainen, “3d room geometry estimation from measured impulse responses,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE,
New York, 2012), pp. 513–516.
15
I. Dokmanic, Y. Lu, and M. Vetterli, “Can one hear the shape of a room:
The 2-D polygonal case,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE,
New York, 2011), pp. 321–324.
16
F. Ribeiro, D. Florencio, D. Ba, and C. Zhang, “Geometrically constrained
room modeling with compact microphone arrays,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.
Speech Signal Processing 20, 1449–1460 (2012).
17
H. Sun, E. Mabande, K. Kowalczyk, and W. Kellermann, “Localization of
distinct reflections in rooms using spherical microphone array eigenbeam
processing,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 131, 2828–2840 (2012).
18
E. Mabande, H. Sun, K. Kowalczyk, and W. Kellermann, “On 2D localization of reflectors using robust beamforming techniques,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2011), pp. 153–156.
19
H. Sun, E. Mabande, K. Kowalczyk, W. Kellermann, “Joint DOA and
TDOA estimation for 3D localization of reflective surfaces using eigenbeam MVDR and spherical microphone arrays,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2011), pp. 113–116.
20
R. Hartley and A. Zisserman, Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003), 655 pp.
21
J. Meyer and G. Elko, “A highly scalable spherical microphone array
based on an orthonormal decomposition of the soundfield,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE, New York, 2002), pp.
1781–1784.
22
H. Kuttruff, Room Acoustics, 4th ed. (Spon Press, London, 2000), pp.
35–159.
23
H. Teutsch, Modal Array Signal Processing: Principles and Applications
of Acoustic Wavefield Decomposition (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2007), pp.
5–221.
24
D. Khaykin and B. Rafaely, “Coherent signals direction-of-arrival estimation using a spherical microphone array: Frequency smoothing approach,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal
Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA) (IEEE, New York, 2009),
pp. 221–224.
25
H. L. V. Trees, Optimum Array Processing: Detection, Estimation, and
Modulation Theory (Wiley, New York, 2002), Chap. 9, pp. 1139–1317.
26
B. Rafaely, Y. Peled, M. Agmon, D. Khaykin, and E. Fisher, “Spherical
microphone array beamforming,” in Speech Processing in Modern
Communication: Challenges and Perspectives, edited by I. Cohen, J.
Benesty, and S. Gannot (Springer, Berlin, 2010), pp. 281–306.
27
J. Allen and D. Berkley, “Image method for efficiently simulating smallroom acoustics,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 65, 943–950 (1979).
28
J. R. Driscoll and J. D. M. Healy, “Computing Fourier transforms and convolutions on the 2-Sphere,” Adv. Appl. Math. 15, 202–250 (1994).
29
E. Williams, Fourier Acoustics: Sound Radiation and Nearfield Acoustical
Holography (Academic Press, London, 1999), Chap. 6, pp. 183–231.
30
H. Teutsch and W. Kellermann, “Detection and localization of multiple
wideband acoustic sources based on wavefield decomposition using spherical apertures,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE, New York,
2008), pp. 5276–5279.
31
H. Wang and M. Kaveh, “Coherent signal-subspace processing for the
detection and estimation of angles of arrival of multiple wide-band
sources,” IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Processing 33, 823–831
(1985).
32
V. Reddy, A. Paulraj, and T. Kailath, “Performance analysis of the optimum beamformer in the presence of correlated sources and its behavior
under spatial smoothing,” IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Processing
35, 927–936 (1987).
33
E. Mabande, H. Sun, K. Kowalczyk, and W. Kellermann, “Comparison of
subspace-based and steered beamformer-based reflection localization
methods,” in Proceedings of the European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO) (Barcelona, Spain, 2011), pp. 146–150.

34

T. Shan and T. Kailath, “Adaptive beamforming for coherent signals and interference,” IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Processing 33, 527–536 (1985).
35
B. Schr€oder, Ordered Sets: An Introduction (Birk€auser, Boston, 2003),
391 pp.
36
M. Kreissig and B. Yang, “A graph theoretical framework for consistent time
differences of arrival,” ITG-Fachtagung Sprachkommunikation 1–4 (2010).
37
J. Ramirez, J. M. Gorriz, and J. Segura, “Voice activity detection. fundamentals and speech recognition system robustness,” in Robust Speech

Recognition and Understanding, edited by M. Grimm and K. Kroschel
(I-TECH Education and Publishing, 2007), pp. 1–22.
38
R. H. Hardin and N. J. A. Sloane, “McLaren’s improved snub cube and
other new spherical designs in three dimensions,” Discrete Comput.
Geom. 15, 429–441 (1996).
39
D. P. Jarrett, E. A. P. Habets, M. R. P. Thomas and P. A. Naylor “Rigid
sphere room impulse response simulation: Algorithm and applications,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 132, 1462–1472 (2012).

01 September 2026 16:58:16

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 134, No. 4, October 2013

Mabande et al.: Room geometry inference

2789

