This is an electronic reprint of the original article.
This reprint may differ from the original in pagination and typographic detail.

Meyer-Kahlen, Nils; Amengual, Sebastià V.; Lokki, Tapio
What the Spatial Decomposition Method can and cannot do
Published in:
ICA 2022 proceedings

Published: 01/01/2022

Document Version
Peer reviewed version

Please cite the original version:
Meyer-Kahlen, N., Amengual, S. V., & Lokki, T. (2022). What the Spatial Decomposition Method can and cannot
do. In ICA 2022 proceedings (Proceedings of the ICA congress). Acoustical Society of Korea (ASK).
https://ica2022korea.org/data/Proceedings_A12.pdf

This material is protected by copyright and other intellectual property rights, and duplication or sale of all or
part of any of the repository collections is not permitted, except that material may be duplicated by you for
your research use or educational purposes in electronic or print form. You must obtain permission for any
other use. Electronic or print copies may not be offered, whether for sale or otherwise to anyone who is not
an authorised user.

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

ABS-0825

What the spatial decomposition method can and cannot do
Nils MEYER-KAHLEN(1) , Sebastià V. AMENGUAL GARÍ(2) , Tapio LOKKI(1)
(1) Acoustics Lab, Department of Signal Processing and Acoustics, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, nils.meyer-kahlen@aalto.
(2) Reality Labs Research, Meta, Redmond, WA, USA

ABSTRACT
The spatial decomposition method (SDM) is a parametric approach for the processing of spatial room impulse
responses. Although extensively used, there are some issues related to used microphone array, reproduction
loudspeaker setup, and signal processing that are not widely understood. For example, there have been different observations with regards to its performance with rendering extremely short transient signals, where some
authors have described issues such as “roughness” or “graininess”. Here, we wish to clarify what the limitations of the spatial decomposition method are and provide practical guidance to ensure the value of SDM as
a tool for spatial room impulse response analysis and rendering in various contexts. Specically, we discuss
directional estimation performance, the ability to estimate two reections at the time, estimation in the late tail
of the response, and the roughness and whitening found in the quality of the nal rendering. Finally, some
post-processing techniques to compensate the possible audible artifacts are reviewed.

Keywords: Directional Room Impulse Responses, Measurement, Auralization

1

INTRODUCTION

The spatial decomposition method (SDM) is a parametric approach for processing spatial room impulse responses (SRIR) that was proposed almost 10 years ago [18]. Since then, it has been applied in a large number
of different studies, regarding the evaluation of concert halls [8] and stage acoustics [3], smaller music venues
[19], sound studios and movie theaters [15], and even cars [17]. In recent times, there have been divergent
observations with regards to its performance, with some authors describing issues such as “graininess” with a
few special signals. The rst evaluation of SDM [18] found out to yield better results than than an earlier parametric room impulse response algorithm, SIRR [10], which is the basis for a more recent development called
HO-SIRR [9]. In [9], SDM performed much worse than both. In a recent pilot study, the obtained perceptual
results were often amongst the best of the methods tested, but depended on the used microphone array [13].
In this paper, we wish to clarify what the capabilities and limitations of the spatial decomposition method
are, and show that while being aware of them, SDM can be a valuable tool for SRIR analysis and rendering. We
rst revisit the sound-eld model underlying SDM in Section 2. In Section 3 we then describe the analysis and
in Section 4 the rendering stage of the classical SDM. For each stage, we rst show the algorithms available in
the SDM toolbox and mention new additions to the SDM framework from more recent publications. We explain
what the SDM can achieve when used correctly, and which limitations are expected in any case. Section 5,
concludes the paper discussing the use of SDM and further directions for parametric SRIR methods.

2

THE UNDERLYING SOUND-FIELD MODEL

Every parametric audio method, may it be operating on running signals or on impulse responses, is based on a
sound eld model. The strength and simultaneously the most important limitation of SDM is the simplicity of
the underlying model. It assumes that at any given sample at time t of a room impulse response, exactly one
sound event occurs, originating from a direction of arrival (DoA) θ (t), with sound pressure p(t). It is assumed
that when knowing the pressure and the DoA at each sample, the sound eld is fully characterized.

Clearly, this parameterization is most reasonable for the direct sound and broad-band early reections found
in a room. The model is less valid in the late part of response, where the density of reections is high. Yet,
this does not mean that no directional information can be extracted at all, as also discussed below.

3

SDM ANALYSIS ...

3.1 ... can estimate the DoAs of individual reections from microphone SRIRs or SH domain SRIRs
Now that the sound eld model is established, algorithms for nding estimates θ̂θ (t) of the directions θ (t)
can be discussed. SDM was rst implemented using estimation based on Time Difference of Arrival (TDoA)
estimation. Later, also the broadband Pseudo Intensity Vector (PIV) was introduced to SDM [4, 22]. Note that
both estimation principles are already described in pioneering work about room impulse response analysis [21].
The choice of analysis methods depends on the choice of microphone array used to capture the SRIR.
If open arrays of omnidirectional capsules are employed [18], TDoA estimation is the best choice. PIV is
preferred for spherical microphone arrays (SMA) known from capturing Ambisonics signals, such as tetrahedral
arrays of cardioid capsules, or arrays with omnidirectional capsules on a rigid sphere. Yet it should be noted
that open arrays can also be used for PIV estimation, and that directional microphones can yield satisfactory
TDoA analysis results as well [19], albeit with degradations compared to omnidirectional capsules.
Time-Difference of Arrival Estimation For TDoA estimation, the responses of an open array of at least four
microphones that are not in the same plane are used to obtain the direction within a block of size N, centered
around each sample t. Typical choices of microphone arrays have been 3D intensity probes, consisting of
six omnidirectional capsules at the centers of the faces of an imagined cube. First, the TDoAs between the
microphone capsules are calculated with sub-sample accuracy using interpolated cross-correlation [16]. Then,
the DoAs are obtained by nding the least squares solution for a plane wave arriving from θ̂θ , as in
1.4
1.2

Ri, j (n) =

1

τi, j = arg max Ri, j (n)

0.8

n

0.6

ln Ri, j (τ + 1) − ln Ri, j (τ − 1)
4 ln Ri, j (τ) − 2 ln Ri, j (τ − 1) − 2 ln Ri, j (τ + 1)

T
τ = τ1,2 + c1,2 , τ1,3 + c1,3 , , τM−1,M + cM−1,M
T

V = r 1 − r 2 , r 1 − r 3 , , r M−1,M

ci, j =

0.4
0.2
0

1 N
∑ hi (t)h j (t + n)
N t=1

-40

-20

0

20

40

Figure 1. Cross-correlation functions with
tted Gaussian functions for one plane wave
in isotropic noise captured with four microphones.

k = V †τ
k
,
θ̂θ =
kk 

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

where τi, j are the time differences of arrival, ci, j are the means of Gaussian functions tted to the crosscorrelated functions Ri, j and V † is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of the matrix of position vector differences
of the microphone capsules, wherein the position vectors r i are the locations of the microphone capsules in
cartesian coordinates. k is called the slowness vector. Note that one does not need to know the speed of sound,
nor the sampling rate for TDoA estimation itself.

(a) Cumulative energy plots of the lateral plane (left) and the median
plane (right), where oor and ceiling reections are visible.

(b) Interactive Map Visualizer

Figure 2. Two ways of representing SDM analysis data. Direct sound as well as oor and ceiling reection are
easily visible on both plots.
Pseudo Intensity Vector PIV as an alternative estimation methods for DRIR [4] was not yet mentioned in
[18], but is available in the SDM toolbox1 . To calculate the PIV, one needs to know the sound pressure and
an estimate of sound velocity along the three coordinate axes. Conveniently, the components of the rst order
Ambisonics response (also called B-Format response) are proportional to pressure and velocities, so that the
(instantaneous, broadband) PIV can be computed as

⊤
θ̂θ (t) = hw (t) hx (t) hy (t) hz (t) 
(8)

3.2 ... can be the basis for reection visualization
The simple sound eld model of SDM makes it possible to visualize reections and thereby directional analysis
of the response (see Fig. 2). This has been used extensively in the analysis of concert halls [14] by overlaying
polar histograms of the acoustic energy in several time intervals.

3.3 ... cannot estimate two sound events in short succession
TDoA estimation From the sound eld model and the directional estimator, it should be clear that directional
analysis fails if two sound events occur simultaneously, wherein it is important to note that simultaneously does
not mean that the sound events need too occur within one sampling interval, but within one analysis block. For
TDoA estimation, the block size should be selected in accordance with the array size. The minimal block size
Nmin should correspond to at least twice the TDoA for sound incidence from a direction parallel to the largest
distance between two microphones,
dmax
fs 
(9)
c
This means that the spatio-temporal limit depends on the size of the array. The larger the array is, the larger
the window size that should be selected, so the larger the distance required between two reections in order
to separate them. Looking at Tmin it becomes clear that increasing the sampling rate fs does not improve
the separation of the reections, which explains the observations from [3]. In TDoA-based proccessing, the
sampling rate inuences the result so that the possible TDoA values are quantized in time. Thereby, also
the possible DoA estimates are quantized to a grid, where the shape depends on the geometry of the array
and the density depends on the product of array size and sampling rate. However, the applied interpolated
cross-correlation solves this problem, so that sub-sample accuracy can be reached, provided sufcient SNR. In
practice, a window function is applied to the frame and the frame size is chosen to be slightly larger than Nmin .
!

N ≥ Nmin = Tmin fs = 2

1 https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/56663-sdm-toolbox

(a) TDoA estimation for a cube array (3D intensity probe)

(b) PIV based on a tetrahedral array (FOA microphone)

Figure 3. Estimation of two plane waves arriving in very short succession (∆t = 005 ms), much shorter than
the window size of 05 ms. The plane waves have a level difference of 6dB. TDoA estimation ideally returns
the direction of the largest peak, while PIV estimation returns a weighted average direction.
PIV estimation Equation (8) shows an instantaneous PIV that returns one direction per sample. It should be
noted that, even though not directly apparent, the temporal resolution is limited by the array size here as well.
In PIV estimation, the window used for estimation of the direction at each sample needs to be long enough for
a sound wave to pass through the complete array. PIV estimation is not necessarily done in blocks, but in [22]
for example, the response is ltered using an 8th order zero-phase bandpass with its upper cutoff at the spatial
aliasing frequency of the array, which for a rst order array is fsa = c(2πr). Low-pass ltering the response
before estimation leads to temporal integration, which rst makes estimation possible.
TDoA and PIV estimations show different behavior for multiple reections found within one analysis window. While TDoA ideally returns the direction of the largest peak, PIV returns a weighted mean of the directions, see Figure 3. Recently, a variant using a new directional estimator, is capable of estimating two directions
at the same time [5]. The method is based on the normalized PIV.
3.4 ... can approximate the directional energy distribution in an anisotropic late eld
Given these results, it is striking that estimation under the sound eld model of one direction at the time still
results in some success also in the late part of the response, where clearly more than one sound event arrives
in each analysis window. An example for TDoA and PIV behaviour have been provided in [11]. In case of
PIV estimation, it can even be shown analytically how the distribution in an anisotropic diffuse eld inuences
the directional statistics of the estimate, which will be presented in upcoming work. Estimation in a simulated
eld, modelled with Gaussian noise sources with direction dependent energy distribution is shown in Fig. 4.

(a) TDoA estimation for a cube array (3D intensity probe)

(b) PIV based on a tetrahedral array (FOA microphone)

Figure 4. DoA estimation in a simulated anisotropic diffuse eld consisting of 180 Gaussian noise sources
around the receiver with different energy, that is indicated by the circles outside of the polar histogram plots.
The estimate follows the directional distribution only to some extend. Arrays with r = 125 cm.

4

SDM RENDERING...

4.1 ... can be performed to loudspeakers or headphones, using arbitrary spatialization techniques
SDM rendering is done by distributing the pressure response to a number of reproduction channels. In case rendering is done to loudspeakers, this can be thought of as nding a selection function wl (t) for each loudspeaker
l, which modulates the pressure response to create the loudspeaker response as in
gl (t) = wl (t)p(t)

(10)

Nearest Loudspeaker Synthesis Nearest Loudspeaker Synthesis (NLS) was the panning approach used in SDM
[18]. It is done by nding the loudspeaker index lNL , which is closest to the directional estimate at each sample

1 l = lNL (t)
wl (t) =
(11)
,
where lNL (t) = arg minθ̂θ (t) − θ l (t)
0 l ̸= lNL (t)
l
Ambisonics Encoding More recently, SDM analysis results have been used to render Ambisonics RIR. If
the input is a rst order Ambisonics DRIR (ARIR), and rendering is also done to Ambisonics, the method
is also referred to Ambisonics SDM (ASDM), or “upmixing”. This creates the modulation functions for each
Ambisonics channel, as opposed to each loudspeaker channel as before. Encoding is a straightforward operation
in the SH domain and an arbitrarily high encoding order N can be used
wN (t) = yN (θ̂θ (t)),

(12)

where y N (θ̂θ (t)) are the real spherical harmonics evaluated at the direction θ̂θ (t), stacked into a vector using
Ambisonics Channel Numbering (ACN). Decoding to loudspeakers can be done with all available Ambisonics
decoding approaches [23].
Headphone Rendering Any of the above approaches can be used to create a binaural response b (t), by treating the L measurement points of an HRTF measurement as virtual loudspeakers and convolving the responses
for these loudspeakers with the HRIR h l (t)
N

L

b (t) = ∑ ∑ gl (n) h l (t − n)

(13)

l=1 n=1

The loudspeaker, Ambisonics or binaural responses are then convolved with an arbitrary source signal.
4.2 ... cannot render very transient sounds without compensation for roughness/graininess
The inevitable result of this rendering stage is that the response of each loudspeaker channel is sparse in time.
This means that the envelope of each loudspeaker channels varies quickly and when listening to one loudspeaker
signal alone, it sounds rough or “grainy”. In the SDM literature, it has been described that since the modulation
functions sum up to 1,

∑ w(t) = 1,

(14)

l

also all the individual sparse reproduction channels gl (t) should also add up to the omnidirectional response
p(t). While this is true if the responses are summed digitally, before reproduction, it is not true in a realistic
listening situation or in binaural rendering. In [12] it has been demonstrated by distributing different kinds
of noise to several loudspeakers, that time and level differences introduced by the head of the listener alone
are able to destroy perfectly coherent summation of the reproduction channels. This either occurs in binaural
rendering, Eq. (13), but also naturally, when listening to the rendering with a loudspeaker array.
The rst consequence of this fact is that the response that is summed at the listeners ears still partly maintains the envelope uctuations of the sparse reproduction channels, so that when rendering very transient sounds,

1

1

1

0

0

0

-1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

(a) Sum of all loudspeaker responses after
SDM rendering.

-1

0

0.1

0.2

(b) One loudspeaker response

0.3

-1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

(c) One loudspeaker response after roughness compensation.

Figure 5. Every loudspeaker response following NLS rendering to L = 48 loudspeakers is sparse in time.
the rendering can sound rough or “grainy”. It should be noted that this problem vanishes for continuous source
signals. Recently, modications to SDM have been introduced to improve roughness. In [2], the rendered binaural response is convolved with the output of a cascade of three Schroeder allpass lters with delay length
M = 37, 113, 215. Figure 5 shows the sum of all channels, and one separate channel g1 (t) before and after
(g̃1 (t)) such a roughness compensation lter.
Essentially, the goal of the roughness compensation lter is to densify the response of each reproduction
channel without changing the relations between the channels and without increasing the reverberation time. This
means that ideally, the lters should be dense, short, and have a at frequency response. This is approached
by the Schroeder cascade, which becomes rather dense after a while and has a frequency response with well
distributed zeros. Since computational efciency is less important when rendering the responses, which are still
to be convolved with the source signal, any noise sequence can be used for roughness compensation. One short,
dense and spectraly at alternative could be an exponentially decaying sequence of random binary noise, which
has a unit pulse at each sample with randomly chosen sign. Further, new approaches for Ambisonics rendering
with SDM are being developed, which offer reduced roughness by rendering additional directions [6].
4.3 ... cannot preserve the spectral content of a SRIR without proper equalization
Another consequence of the sparsity of each channel and the imperfect summation at the listeners ears is a
change in spectrum, which was rst noticed in [17]. Clearly, each of the sparse loudspeaker responses has
a different spectrum compared to the initial, omnidirectional response in that the pseudo-random amplitude
modulation has spread the energy in frequency, such that additional high frequency content is present. If now
all these “whitened” channels are added incoherently, their spectral content is still retained in the nal rendered
response.
To compensate the whitening effect, equalization should be applied to each block of the rendered response.
Such equalization needs to be done carefully, in order to avoid time aliasing artefacts and audible amplitude
modulation. The omnidirectional channel and the reproduction channels are therefore split into blocks of length
M. We could denote for example, p(k) (t) = p(t + kM), for t = 0, M − 1 and zero elsewhere. Then, an equal(k)
ization lter response sl is determined for each channel and each block as from the DFTs of pressure p(k) ( f )
and channel responses




(k) ( f )∥
∥p
(k)
(k)
(k)
(k)
gEQ
(15)
sl = F −1
exp ıφl ( f )
l (t) = ∑ gl (t − kM) ∗ sl (t)
(k)
∥gl ( f )∥
k

Therein, the phase φ can be selected for benecial time behaviour of the correction lter s, as for example
linear or minimum phase. The correction lters are then convolved with the respective blocks and added.
When implementing this equalization it is important to assure that at least M zeros are appended to each block
in order to avoid time aliasing. What should further be mentioned is that there are also other variants of
this equalization. In [22] for example, equalization is instead done with an octave lter-bank on each of the
Ambisonics channels, as obtained by eq. (12). In [2], instead of equalizing the response, only the decay of the
rendered binaural response is adjusted.

4.4 ... cannot create fully authentic stimuli in general
We could say that a virtual acoustics rendering is “authentic", if it can not be distinguished from a real world
stimulus. Concerning SDM, one way to test its authenticity would be to compare a binaural SDM rendering
to a binaural dummy head reference. Given the properties of rendering described above, which need to be
carefully corrected, it is not surprising that in listening tests using direct comparison to a binaural reference,
SDM is usually found to be noticeably different [1, 11, 13].
4.5 ... can create plausible auralizations
Even though, in a direct comparison to a binaural reference, differences are often audible, SDM can still produce high quality renderings. Plausibility can be dened as evoking the auditory illusion of a rendered sound
to be real [7]. If this illusion even occurs when both rendered sources and real sources are present, either
simultaneously or non-simultaneously, one may speak of transfer-plausible rendering [20]. In [2], binaural SDM
renderings were used in a test akin to a transfer-plausibility design. They were believed to be real as often as
a real loudspeaker.

5

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

We have demonstrated several aspects of what SDM can do, and some that it can not. It has became clear that
the broadband analysis stage of SDM is a robust way to identify reections in the early part of the response,
but that the temporal resolution is limited by the size of the used microphone array, regardless of the estimation
method. Also, we have seen that despite the obvious violation of the sound eld model, the late energy distributions can be approximated in a particular sense. More potential problems lie on the synthesis side, for example
when rendering very transient signals. Here, the simplicity of the sound eld model poses a problem, but we
have described strategies for roughness and whitening compensation. Still, all previous research has shown that
SDM can robustly provide renderings that possess the main characteristics of a measured space, which makes
it a valuable tool for further research. In the near future, a new version of the SDM toolbox will be released,
which incorporates all the discussed processing steps, including roughness compensation. Future directions for
parametric processing of impulse responses in general are incorporating more advanced sound eld models with
multiple sources and developing strategies for reliable objective and subjective testing of SRIR algorithms.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was part of the VRACE project that has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska Curie actions (grant agreement number 812719.)

REFERENCES
[1] J. Ahrens. Perceptual Evaluation of Binaural Auralization of Data Obtained from the Spatial Decomposition
Method. In IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA), New
Paltz, NY, USA, Oct. 2019.
[2] S. V. Amengual Garí, P. T. Calamia, and P. W. Robinson. Optimizations of the spatial decomposition
method for binaural reproduction. J. Audio Eng. Soc., 68(12):959–976, Dec. 2020.
[3] S. V. Amengual Garí, W. Lachenmayr, and E. Mommertz. Spatial analysis and auralization of room acoustics using a tetrahedral microphone. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 141(4):EL369–EL374, Apr. 2017.
[4] M. Frank and F. Zotter. Spatial impression and directional resolution in the reproduction of reverberation.
In DAGA - Fortschritte der Akustik, Mar. 2016.
[5] L. Gölles and F. Zotter. Directional enhancement of rst-order ambisonic room impulse responses by the
2+2 directional signal estimator. In 15th International Conference on Audio Mostly, Sept. 2020.

[6] E. Hoffbauer and M. Frank. 4-directional ambisonic spatial decomposition method with reduced temporal
artifacts. 2022. accepted.
[7] A. Lindau and S. Weinzierl.
98(5):804–810, Sept. 2012.

Assessing the plausibility of virtual acoustic environments.

Acta Acust,

[8] T. Lokki, J. Pätynen, A. Kuusinen, and S. Tervo. Concert hall acoustics: Repertoire, listening position,
and individual taste of the listeners inuence the qualitative attributes and preferences. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
140(1):551–562, July 2016.
[9] L. McCormack, V. Pulkki, A. Politis, O. Scheuregger, and M. Marschall. Higher-order spatial impulse
response rendering: investigating the perceived effects of spherical order, dedicated diffuse rendering, and
frequency resolution. J. Audio Eng. Soc, 68(5):368–354, May 2020.
[10] J. Merimaa. Analysis, synthesis, and perception of spatial sound - binaural localization modeling and multichannel loudspeaker reproduction. PhD thesis, Helsinki University of Technology, 2006.
[11] N. Meyer-Kahlen, S. J. Schlecht, and T. Lokki. Parametric late reverberation from broadband directional
estimates. Int. Conf. on Immersive and 3D Audio (I3DA), Sept. 2021.
[12] N. Meyer-Kahlen, S. J. Schlecht, and T. Lokki. Perceptual roughness of spatially assigned sparse noise for
rendering reverberation. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 150(5):3521–3531, Nov. 2021.
[13] A. Pawlak, H. Lee, T. Lund, and A. Makivirta. Subjective evaluation of spatial analysis and synthesis
methods using different microphone arrays. In Int. Conf. on Immersive and 3D Audio (I3DA), Sept. 2021.
[14] J. Pätynen, S. Tervo, and T. Lokki. Analysis of concert hall acoustics via visualizations of time-frequency
and spatiotemporal responses. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 133(2):842–857, Feb. 2013.
[15] J. Riionheimo. Movie sound, part 2: Preference and attribute ratings of six listening environments. J.
Audio Eng. Soc., 69(1), Jan. 2021.
[16] S. Tervo and T. Lokki. Interpolation methods for the SRP-PHAT algorithm. In International Workshop on
Acoustic Signal Enhancement, Jan. 2008.
[17] S. Tervo, J. Pätynen, N. Kaplanis, and e. al. Spatial analysis and synthesis of car audio system and car
cabin acoustics with a compact microphone array. J. Audio Eng. Soc., 63(11):914–925, Feb. 2015.
[18] S. Tervo, J. Pätynen, A. Kuusinen, and T. Lokki. Spatial decomposition method for room impulse responses. J. Audio Eng. Soc., 61(1):17–28, Mar. 2013.
[19] S. Tervo, J. Saarelma, J. Pätynen, I. Huhtakallio, and P. Laukkanen. Spatial analysis of the acoustics of
rock and nightclubs. In Proceedings of the Institute of Acoustics, volume 37, pages 551–558, Oct. 2015.
[20] S. Wirler, N. Meyer-Kahlen, and S. J. Schlecht. Towards transfer-plausibility for evaluating mixed reality
audio in complex scenes. In AES International Conference on Audio for Virtual and Augmented Reality, Aug.
2020.
[21] Y. Yamasaki and T. Itow. Measurement of spatial information in sound elds by closely located four point
microphone method. J. Acoust. Soc. Jpn (E), 10(2):101–110, 1989.
[22] M. Zaunschirm, M. Frank, and F. Zotter. Binaural rendering with measured room responses: rst-order
ambisonic microphone vs. dummy head. Applied Sciences, 10(5):1631, Feb. 2020.
[23] F. Zotter and M. Frank. Ambisonics: A practical 3D Audio Theory for Recording, Studio Production, Sound
Reinforcement, and Virtual Reality, volume 19 of Springer Topics in Signal Processing. Springer International
Publishing, 2019.

View publication stats

