Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira. ISSN 0122-1701

471

Low-cost and easily implemented anechoic
acoustic chambers
Cámaras anecoicas acústicas de bajo costo y fácil implementación
Alejandro Orrego González1, Joao Luis Ealo Cuello1, Jhon Fernando Pazos Ospina2
1

3

Escuela de Ingeniería Mecánica, Universidad del Valle - Sede Cali, Cali, Colombia.
Facultad Escuela Militar de Aviación Marco Fidel Suarez - Fuerza Aérea, Cali, Colombia.
alejandro.orrego@correounivalle.edu.co
joao.ealo@correounivalle.edu.co
jhonfpazos@gmail.com

Resumen— En este trabajo se presenta el diseño, construcción y
evaluación de una cámara anecoica de bajo costo usando
I.
NTRODUCTION
materiales provistos por el mercado local; tales como: espuma de
poliuretano, tubos de acero, fibra de vidrio, placas de
An anechoic chamber is an enclosure designed to recreate free
fibrocemento, placas de madera aglomerada, etc. La cámara posee
dimensiones de trabajo de 1,94 m de largo x 1,91 m de ancho x 1,84 field conditions. This type of enclosure has been implemented
m de alto y frecuencia de corte nominal de 400 Hz, a partir de la since the 1950s as a controlled environment for research in the
cual la cámara recrea condiciones de espacio al aire libre en field of acoustics [1]. In anechoic chambers, acoustic
cuanto a ondas sonoras se refiere. Pudo constatarse que la cámara characterization of all types of sound sources and receivers, such
cumple con la desviación máxima permitida de la ley del inverso as machinery, home appliances [2], audio sources [3],
cuadrado según la norma ISO 3745. El desarrollo de este tipo de automobiles , aircraft [4], microphones, and others, is performed
proyectos es de vital importancia para la evolución tecnológica de [5]. Anechoic chambers are also used to investigate the relation
países emergentes, ya que estimula la actividad de los of sound to disease in humans [6], among other research areas.
investigadores y da posibilidades a la industria local para el
Research centers, such as the National Aeronautics and Space
desarrollo de procesos y productos en temas relacionados con la
Acústica, temática poco desarrollada en países en vía de Administration (NASA, USA) [7], the University of Salford
(England) [8], the Western Michigan University (USA) [8] and
desarrollo.

the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM,
Mexico) [9], and some of the most prestigious companies
Palabras clave— cámara anecoica, campo libre, ley del inverso
worldwide, such as BMW, Whirlpool, and Bosch, employ
cuadrado, frecuencia de corte, norma ISO 3745.
anechoic chambers during the research, design and
Abstract— In this paper, the design, construction and verification characterization of their products.
of a low-cost and easy-to-install anechoic chamber are described.
The chamber is constructed with affordable, local materials. The In much of South America, including Colombia, acoustics, as the
quality, according to the deviation from the inverse square law, branch of physics that studies the propagation of mechanical
complies with ISO 3745. The working dimensions of the chamber waves through materials, has not been well studied. As a result,
are 1.94 m long x 1.91 m wide x 1.84 m high. The nominal cutoff there is a high degree of informality in the decision-making
frequency is 400 Hz. The cost per square meter of the effective process in companies and institutions when faced with acoustics
finished volume is 200 USD. With this design, small- and medium- problems. Companies are restricted to importing technologies or
sized enterprises are able to build anechoic chambers with a small
outsourcing characterization tests, depending on their
investment, adding value to their products through
characterization and subsequent mitigation, conditioning or requirements. However, little is invested in the development of
amplification, as necessary, of emitted sound or noise. This study basic acoustics knowledge, new products or processes. In
also contributes to the development and appropriation of Colombia, for example, there is no known record of the existence
knowledge in acoustics, a branch of physics of emerging of a qualified acoustic anechoic chamber providing services, or
importance in developing countries.
having the ability to provide services, to national companies in

the development or improvement of their products. Therefore,
Key Word — anechoic chamber, acoustics, low cost, free field, companies must request such services of foreign entities, where
inverse square law, cutoff frequency, ISO 3745.
the cost of each acoustic characterization of an acoustical

Fecha de Recepción: 4 de marzo de 2018
Fecha de Aceptación: 13 de diciembre de 2018

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

472

absorber material can easily exceed several thousand dollars. It
is well known that the domestic industry is experiencing an
increasing demand in a globalized market, which seeks
standardized products in all aspects. With respect to noise, lowemission products are sought; therefore, it is vital to have an
anechoic chamber where products can be characterized and/or
improved.
In Colombia, two anechoic chambers have been reported: one in
Bogotá, which is a scale prototype of a possible anechoic
chamber of a larger size [1], and a semi-anechoic chamber at the
Universidad Nacional de Medellín in the Applied Technologies
Research Group (ATRG), which has been used for noise
characterization from refrigerators [9].
Considering the lack of locally available anechoic chambers, the
aim of this study is to promote the construction and development
of anechoic chambers in Colombia. The design, construction and
preliminary verification of an anechoic chamber are described in
this paper. From the beginning, the work had two important
requirements: 1. the chamber must be inexpensive and therefore
accessible to small- and medium-sized companies, and 2. the
materials used in construction should be easy to obtain locally.
The basic principles for the design of an anechoic chamber for
acoustic purposes are presented first. Subsequently, the
determination of the chamber size is described, and building
materials are proposed. Computer simulation results are used to
finalize the proposed design. Finally, the details of the built
chamber and the results of the verification are presented. These
results indicate that it is possible to achieve an enclosure of
outstanding quality that emulates free-field conditions with little
capital investment.

II.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

An anechoic chamber is an enclosure consisting primarily of
insulating walls, anechoic wedges, support grids, and elastic
material for the insulation of structurally transmitted noise.
Figure 1 illustrates the basic guidelines applied to the design
and construction of an anechoic chamber.
The sizing of the anechoic chamber is one of the most important
steps, requiring the greatest care. Equations (1), (2) and (3)
define the internal dimensions of the anechoic chamber (h is the
height, w is the width and l is the length) as follows [5]:
ℎ=

+2 + +

(1)

=

+4 + +2

(2)

=

+2 + +2

(3)

where is the maximum dimension of the sound source to be
characterized within the enclosure, 2 is the distance between
the microphone and the sound source, is the wavelength at
the cutoff frequency of the anechoic chamber (400 Hz in this

case) and is the minimum distance from the source to one of
the anechoic walls ( ≥ /4).

Figure 1. Diagram of design and construction process of the anechoic chamber.
Source: The authors.

In addition, the resonances of the anechoic chamber should not
be linked to the modes of vibration of the enclosure; i.e., they
should not be too close to one another to minimize constructive
interference that would negatively affect the performance of the
chamber. The vibration modes of a parallelepiped enclosure are
described by equation (4) [10]:
, ,

=

( ) +( ) +( )

(4)

Where , , are the inner dimensions of the chamber in
meters and , , ! are integer values (0, 1, 2, 3…, n). The
designation of each mode is given according to , , !. The
axial modes of vibration contain more energy than the
tangential and oblique modes of vibration because they occur
by reflection on fewer surfaces [10][11]. As the number of
reflections increases, the amount of energy dissipated on the
walls and in the medium through which the wave travels
increases. Therefore, when determining the final dimensions of
the chamber, the density of resonance frequencies should be as
low as possible in accordance with the space available,
reducing the possible superposition of eigenmodes of the
enclosure.
The external dimensions of the anechoic chamber depend on
the size and geometry of the structures that comprise the lining
and the thickness of the wall insulation. The dimensions of the
lining are linked to the wavelength at the designed cutoff
frequency (400 Hz). There are different types of anechoic lining
structures; however, the geometries most commonly used are
wedges. The parts of such anechoic wedge are shown in Figure
2. The total length (D) must be a quarter of the wavelength at
the cutoff frequency. Generally, in anechoic absorbers type
wedges, the base (L2) is approximately 1/6D, L1 is
approximately 5/6D and the air space (L3) is approximately
1/8D. The recommended angle θ is approximately 30°. Much
lower angles excessively increase the number of required
wedges, and much greater angles reduce the total absorption

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

area. The angle θ defines the height of the wedge base (r)
[5][12][13][14].

result of the friction of the air particles inside the pores of the
absorbent material. A device used to measure the sound
absorption coefficient of materials is known as a Kundt tube.
III.

Figure 2. Anechoic wedge with air space and posterior double wall. Source:
The authors.

The anechoic chamber must be isolated from external noises
that might disturb the measurements to be performed in the
chamber. An efficient strategy for airborne noise insulation
utilizes double walls with absorbent material fill. Equation (5)
is used to calculate the insulation R for this type of double wall
[15]:
∗

∗*

" = 20 ∗ %& ' (∗+ )∗) , ∗ (2-). ∗

./

(5)

where 0 is the density of the absorbent material separating the
walls, 1 is the speed of sound in air, 2 and
are the masses
of the walls, 4 is the separation between the walls and is the
cutoff frequency for the operation of the insulation. Insulation
from flanking noise, i.e., the noise from outside that is
transmitted through the structure supporting the chamber, is
minimized by supporting the structure by elastic material, such
as neoprene, natural rubber, or hangers [15][16][17].
In the early twentieth century, Wallace Sabine developed an
expression to predict the reverberation time in an enclosed area.
This parameter is the time between the first emission of a sound
and when it drops 60 dB from its initial value [18]. The RT
within an anechoic chamber has been measured at 30 ms [1].
Lower values in the same order the magnitude have also been
reported. The expression for the RT is as follows:
RT =

7.292:
;<

(6)

where V is the volume of the room in m3, > is the area of the
absorbing surface in m2 and ? is the coefficient of absorption
of the surface. Other authors have developed their own
expressions for calculating the reverberation time (Eyring,
Millintong and Fitzroy) [19].
Porous or fibrous materials, such as polyurethane foams
(porous) or rockwool (fibrous), and fiberglass are used as
absorber materials. These materials are used because they have
sound absorption coefficients greater than 0.9 in the audible
frequency range (20 Hz to 20 kHz). That is, more than 90% of
the sound energy incident on these materials is absorbed within
their structures by transforming the sound energy into heat as a

473

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The design and construction of the anechoic chamber integrate
a series of processes that focus on the same goal, which is to
achieve conditions of open-air space within an enclosure. In
view of this, the enclosure must be insulated from external
noise, and sound generated internally must be absorbed by the
inner walls. In addition to the design and construction process,
an evaluation of the anechoic chamber is required.
A. Lining structure
The methodology used in this work for the development of
anechoic wedges comprises three steps: 1. the selection of the
material for manufacturing the wedges; 2. the evaluation of the
absorption coefficient of the selected material; and 3. the
verification of the design, using a finite element software to
evaluate the acoustic response of the material with the
stipulated geometry.
For this study, flexible open-cell polyurethane was selected as
the material for manufacturing the anechoic wedges because it
is innocuous, it has a high sound absorption coefficient [20], is
an easy material to obtain on the local market and is easy to
handle. It is also simple to fabricate an anechoic wedge from
flexible open-cell polyurethane. Three different flexible opencell polyurethane foams of different densities were evaluated,
i.e., D40 (40 kg/m3), D30 (30 kg/m3) and Spumflex (Espumas
Flexibles de Colombia S.A.S.) (18kg/m3), to find the material
with the largest sound absorption coefficient. A Kundt tube was
used to measure the sound absorption coefficients of specimens
45 mm in diameter and 50 mm and 75 mm in thickness.
Furthermore, within the design stage of the wedges, a finite
element model was developed using the acoustics module of
COMSOL MultiphysicsTM to simulate the acoustic behavior of
an array of 4 anechoic wedges and to estimate the sound
pressure reflected by the wedges. The configuration of the
model conditions is shown in Figure 3. The model used 16
elements per wavelength. The scattered field formulation was
used.
B. Construction
The materials used in the construction of the anechoic chamber
were all purchased on the local market, easily accessible and
commonly used in construction. The materials included steel
tubes with a square profile of 6 cm x 6 cm and a thickness of
2.5 mm, fiberglass, flexible open-cell polyurethane foam with
a density of 40 kg/m3, thick fiber cement sheets with a
thickness of 8 mm, chipboard, wooden slats with a profile of 1
in x 2 in, assembly screws, silicone and 1.9 m x 1.9 m stainless
steel mesh.

474

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

Figure 4. Anechoic chamber assembly. Source: The authors.
Figure 3. Boundary and material conditions in the simulation model of anechoic
wedges. Source: The authors.

The frame was built first. The tubes were filled with foam and
then arc welded. Subsequently, fiber cement external walls
were assembled, and the chipboard internal walls were fastened
to the welded tube frame. Fiberglass was placed between the
walls to complete the construction of the double wall insulation
for airborne noise. On the inner walls, wooden slats were
fastened to the chipboard panels with assembly screws. The
anechoic wedges were glued to the wooden slats with
polychloroprene glue. A model of the assembly process is
shown in Figure 4. To maximize the acoustic absorption area,
the tips of two adjacent wedges are located forming an angle of
90 degrees.
Final external dimensions of the anechoic chamber are 2.44 m
wide x 2.44 m long and 2.34 m high. The internal dimensions
are 2.34 m wide x 2.37 m long x 2 27 m high. Regarding the
work space, dimensions are 1.94 m long x 1.91 m wide x 1.84
m high.

A microphone is placed 1 m from the source, and
measurements are taken at 9 points on a diagonal from the first
point, spaced 10 cm from each other, in the direction indicated
by the black arrow in Figure 5.

To qualify an anechoic chamber based on sound pressure levels
(SPLs) measured at the specified positions, the theoretical SPLs
must be estimated. These are determined for each measurement
point using the following equation [13]:
C
@ (A) = 20 %& BDED G

(7)

F

λ/4

C. Evaluation of the anechoic chamber

Figure 5. Measurement direction with source and microphone initial position
into the anechoic chamber. Source: The authors.

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

475

where r is the distance from the source to the measurement
position,
)

(∑J D ) EL ∑J D )

I
= ∑J DIK(∑JI M EL IK(
∑J D M
IK( I

IK( I

(8)

IK( I I

∑T Q ∑T Q S E∑T Q ) ∑T S

R
V
r7 = − P RK(∑TR QRK(∑TR RS EURK(∑TR Q RK(
S
RK( R

RK( R

(9)

RK( R R

qX = 10E7.7Z[\R

(10)

@] and A] are, respectively, the SPL and the distance measured

from the center to each position, and ^ is the number of
measurement positions for each line over which the test is
performed.
The deviations of the SPLs are then calculated with respect to
the inverse square law using the following equation:
∆ @] =

@] −

@ (A] ) [4a]

(11)

where,

Figure 6. Diagram of the configuration of the experimental set-up. Source: The
authors.

IV.

RESULTS

The dimensions of the constructed anechoic chamber were
selected to maximize the use of space available in our
laboratory. As the principal dimensions of the enclosure were
all different, no overlapping of the axial eigenfrequencies
occurs. The eigenfrequency distribution of the designed
chamber was computed and then the difference between
adjacent frequencies was calculated. The mean intermodal
frequency distance is 20 Hz. As there is no a general rule
available regarding the minimum allowed frequency separation
between adjacent eingenfrequencies, Figure 7 shows the
distribution of the eigenfrequency separation of the chamber
designed.

∆ @] is the deviation from the inverse square law in decibels,
@] is the SPL of the measurement at the i-th position in
decibels, and @ (A] )is the SPL at a distance A] , estimated by the
inverse square law in decibels. The deviations permissible
according to ISO 3745 are shown in Table 1.
In the evaluation of the anechoic chamber, pink noise was used
as excitation signal to generate sound with equal energy over
the bandwidth of interest. The acoustic measurement
equipment consists of a ¼-in 40BF free-field microphone
(G.R.A.S, Denmark) as a receiving element for the acoustic
signal and a conditioning amplifier, model 2690-0F2 (Bruel &
Kjaer, Denmark), which prepares the signal before sending it to
the data acquisition system. The sound source is an 8M300
coaxial speaker (8 ohm – 200 watts, Bellsound, ITALY)
connected to a XA-950 amplifier (AIWA, Korea). For data
acquisition, a U2531A system (Agilent, USA) connected to a
computer was employed. The configuration of the experimental
set-up is shown in Figure 6.
Table 1. Maximum permissible deviation of the sound pressure levels measured
from the theoretical levels using the inverse square law. (ISO, 2003).

Type of test
chamber
Anechoic
chamber

One-third-octave
band frequencies [Hz]
≤630
from 800 to 5000
from 800 to 5000

Source: Adapted from [13].

Permissible
deviation [dB]
±1.5
±1.0
±1.5

Figure 7. Result of the eigenfrequency separations obtained from the selected
dimensions of the designed anechoic chamber. Source: The authors.

The results of the characterization of the anechoic wedges
obtained by simulation are now presented. The experimental
results of the material characterization and the assessment of
the constructed chamber are also shown.
The material selected for manufacturing the lining was flexible
open-cell D40 polyurethane foam, which has the highest sound
absorption in the frequency range used for evaluation, i.e. a
coefficient absorption above 0.9 at all frequencies of interest.
Figure 8 shows the characterization results of the polyurethane
roam samples in theKundt's tube. The lining of the chamber
constructed consists of 3700 linear wedges of D40.

476

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

Figure 8. Sound absorption coefficients for D34, D40 and Spumflex foam. Two
different thickness were used, i.e. 50 mm and 75 mm. Source: The authors.

In Figure 9, the results from the finite element model show that
both the geometrical configuration of the designed wedges and
the selected material provide very high absorption, i.e. the
reflected sound pressure, at 20 cm from the wedges, is reduced
in approximately 47 dB with respect to the incident plane wave.

up to 4 kHz. It is appreciated that one measured point is
exceeding the limits by 1.0 dB at 500 Hz. Even though this
might be attributable to possible reflections from near reflectors
of the experimental setup, this result is also likely due to several
causes, i.e. a small frequency distance between adjacent modes
or, in the worst case scenario, a non-detected construction issue.
Furthermore, it is important to mention that the chamber
satisfies the limits that the standard establishes for a hemianechoic chamber. Also, as expected, the results showed that at
frequencies below the nominal cutoff frequency, soundpressure deviations exceed the limit stipulated.
The main conclusion from acoustic measurements is that the
chamber is in conformance with the requirements of the
standard in the direction and frequency range in which the test
was performed. Similarly, it can be shown that the chamber
meets the standard in different directions. This process is a
viable alternative when undertaking a proper qualification
without omnidirective sources, which are rather expensive.
Similarly, it is possible to repeat the procedure for each desired
direction; therefore, the characterization of sound sources can
be performed over any path of interest.
The results of the evaluation of the background noise relative
to the measured acoustic signal, presented in Figure 11, show
that the acoustic signal corresponding to pink noise is more than
10 dB above the background noise in all frequency bands
evaluated as suggested by the standard.

Figure 9. Estimated acoustic pressure (in Pascals) reflected by a set of four
anechoic wedges at the cutoff frequency (400 Hz). Source: The authors.

Although reverberation time is not a parameter included within
ISO 3745, we estimate it for comparison with data reported in
literature. Reverberation time allows to know how quickly the
energy dissipates in a room, it can also be used as an indicator
of the anechoic chamber's performance. Using equation (6) we
estimate that the camera has a reverberation time of RT = 0.013
s, comparable with that reported by Luque and Quintanana in
[1], RT = 0.0297 s. It should be noted that as the value is closer
to zero the reverberation in the room is low, which is required
to
properly
emulate
the
square
inverse
law.

A better performance is expected at higher frequencies. The
properties of the material of the anechoic wedges were
extracted from technical reports available for a polyurethane
sample of D40 material: a porosity of 0.995, a flow resistivity
of 10.5e3 b ∙ d/ , a tortuosity of 2, a viscous characteristic
length of 240 µm and a thermal characteristic length of 470 µm.
In spite of the theoretical character of this result, it allowed us
to carry out relative comparison of the absorption performance
of different configurations. This also enabled us to determine
the optimal air gap between the chipboard and the base of
wedges.
Strictly speaking, the acoustic evaluation showed that the
chamber built, based on the designed cutoff frequency (400
Hz), is in conformance with the maximum values of deviation
from the inverse square law stipulated in ISO 3745 (black
dotted line in Figure 10) for frequencies higher than 500 Hz and

Figure 10. Results of the experimental evaluation of the inverse square law
inside the anechoic chamber constructed, following the qualifying

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.
methodology proposed by Gomez et al [21]. Results for one-third-octave band
pink noise. Source: The authors.

Figure 11. Results of the evaluation of the background noise of the anechoic
chamber compared with the measured acoustic signal (pink noise). Source: The
authors.

V.

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

It is possible to build a low-cost and easily installed anechoic
chamber, using affordable materials available on the local
market of sufficient quality, that complies with the
requirements stipulated in ISO 3745. The total cost of the
manufacturing materials used in the chamber prototype was
$12,300.000 COP, corresponding to approximately 200 USD
per square meter of effective built volume. The additional costs
associated with manufacturing are estimated to be low because
no specialized knowledge is required. If a lower cutoff
frequency is intended, e.g 100 Hz, the cost per square meter
would increase in approximately four times.
The proposed evaluation method involved the calculation of the
level of deviation from the inverse square law along one of the
diagonals of the constructed anechoic chamber. The results
were satisfactory based on the designed cutoff frequency (400
Hz). While testing was not performed according to the
standard, the results can be used to predict that similar results
will be obtained along any other diagonal, under the assumption
that the construction was uniform with respect to the
distribution and attachment of the wedges to the structure.
Results showed that the anechoic chamber presented the best
performance for frequencies between 500 Hz and 4 kHz for all
points measured. Therefore, the constructed chamber can be
used in the characterization of sound sources at frequencies
exceeding that lower frequency limit. Although the process of
complete testing is pending, the chamber in its current state is
a useful tool for optimizing acoustic design or for analyzing the
performance of a given sound source through relative
comparison of experiments carried out in its interior. That is,
repeating the screening test in the different directions of interest
would be enough. Even though, in some cases, the requirements
of the standard might not be met in all directions or frequencies,
characterization results could still be useful to compare the
performance of different samples of the same type of product.

477

The measured background noise satisfied the ISO
recommendation, i.e., that there should be at least a 10dB
difference between the background noise and the signal to be
measured at all frequencies of interest.
Finally, the selection process of the construction materials,
particularly the one needed to fabricate the wedges, showed
that, in general, local manufacturers of foams are not aware of
the commercial potential of their products for acoustic
conditioning of enclosures. This study enables small- and
medium-sized companies, by making a small investment, to
add value to their products through characterization and
subsequent mitigation or amplification, as appropriate, of the
sound or noise their products emit. This study also contributes
to the development and appropriation of knowledge in
acoustics, which is a branch of physics of emerging importance
in developing countries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially funded by the “FRANCISCO JOSÉ
DE CALDAS NATIONAL FUND FOR SCIENCE,
TECHNOLOGY, AND INNOVATION” (Colciencias, Project
1106-669-45414, Colombia).

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

R. García and R. Quintana, “Diseño de una cámara
anecoica con aplicación para trabajo acústico,”
Universidad San Buenaventura, 2007.
J. Y. Jeon, J. You, and H. Y. Chang, “Sound radiation
and sound quality characteristics of refrigerator noise
in real living environments,” Appl. Acoust., vol. 68,
no. 10, pp. 1118–1134, 2007.
A. P. López, E. P. González, and S. J. P. Ruiz,
“Fuente sonora omni-direccional,” Rev. Mex. Fis.,
2006.
V. F. Kopiev et al., “Construction of an anechoic
chamber for aeroacoustic experiments and
examination of its acoustic parameters,” Acoust.
Phys., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 113–124, 2017.
S. Leeudomwongs, Y. Juntarapaso, P. Kongthavorn,
A. Thongboon, and V. Plangsaengmas, “Design and
Qualification Testing of a Miniature Anechoic
Chamber for the Calibration of Small Medical
Devices,” ICSV, vol. 20, no. July, pp. 7–11, 2013.
F. Gougoux, R. J. Zatorre, M. Lassonde, P. Voss, and
F. Lepore, “A functional neuroimaging study of
sound localization: Visual cortex activity predicts
performance in early-blind individuals,” PLoS Biol.,

478
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]

Scientia et Technica Año XXIII, Vol. 23, No. 04, diciembre de 2018. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 0324–0333, 2005.
NASA, “NASA’s Anechoic Chamber for Sound
Research.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.nasa.gov/audience/foreducators/topnav/
materials/listbytype/NASAs_Anechoic_Chamber.ht
ml.
University of Salford, “Anechoic chamber.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.salford.ac.uk/acousticstesting/labs/anechoic-chamber.
R. Ruiz Boullosa and A. Pérez López, “Some
acoustical properties of the anechoic chamber at the
Centro de Instrumentos, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México,” Appl. Acoust., vol. 56, no. 3,
pp. 199–207, 1999.
J. García Rodríguez, “Design and implementation
aspects of a small anechoic room and soundactuation system,” 2011.
J. G. Cabrera, “Acústica y Fundamentos del Sonido.”
Universidad Nacional Abierta y a Distancia, 2010.
A. Eckel and I. Ver, “Design and construction
consideration for automobile and automotive
component acoustic test facilities,” in INTER-NOISE
and NOISE-CON Congress and Conference
Proceedings, 2002, vol. 2002, no. 4, pp. 1911–1918.
ISO, “3745: 2012,‘Acoustics—Determination of
sound power levels of noise sources using sound
pressure—Precision methods for anechoic and hemianechoic rooms,’” International Organization for
Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland. 2003.
L. L. Beranek and H. P. Sleeper Jr, “The design and
construction of anechoic sound chambers,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 140–150, 1946.
M. Recuero, “Acondicionamiento acústico,”
Paraninfo-Thomson Learn. Madrid, 2001.
M. Redonda Fernández, “Acústica aplicada a la
edificación: evolución histórica desde la Antigüedad
hasta su actual integración en los procesos
constructivos.,” 2013.
M. Moser and J. L. Barros, “Ingeniería acústica,”
Teoría y Apl. Berlin, Alem. Springer–Verlag Berlin
Heidelb., 2009.
W. C. Sabine, Collected papers on acoustics.
Harvard university press, 1922.
C. E. Boschi, “Método para medir el tiempo de
reverberación en recintos,” Lab. Acústica y Son.
“Mario Guillermo Camín” Univ. Tecnológica Nac.
Mendoza. ISSN, pp. 1668–7523, 2008.
J. Davern, WA and Hutchinson, “Polyurethane ether
foam wedges for anechoic chamber,” Appl. Acoust.,
vol. 4, pp. 287--302, 1971.
J. J. Gomez Alfageme, J. L. Sanchez Bote, and E.
Blanco Martín, “New measurement methods for
anechoic chamber characterization,” in 122nd AES
Convention, 2008.

