QUIET DRONES
Second International e-Symposium
on
UAV/UAS Noise
27th to 30th June 2022
Accurate measurement of Drone Noise on the ground

Per Rasmussen – Acoustic consultant: pr@grasacoustics.com
Lars Winberg – Business Development Manager: lw@grasacoustics.com

Summary

Accurate measurement of noise from smaller unmanned aerial vehicles/systems (UAVs/UASs)
can be performed in anechoic chambers, but larger types need to be tested in outdoor
environments. This will introduce ground reflections that may disturb the measurements if
microphones are mounted above the ground. By placing the measurement microphone on a fully
reflecting ground board, the influence of the reflection becomes well defined and will result in a
simple pressure doubling. By using flush-mounted microphones in the ground board, the
frequency range of the system may be extended to cover the full audible range up to 20 kHz.

1. Introduction
With an increasing number of lightweight and small multirotor unmanned aerial systems (UASs),
the need for assessing the methods used for accurate UAS noise measurements is increasing.
The characteristics of noise from lightweight and small multirotor UASs differ from jet and
propeller-driven airplanes in frequency and tonality. Also, large jet airplanes typically fly in
predefined air corridors, different from smaller propeller-driven airplanes flying at lower altitudes,
while lightweight and small multirotor UASs normally operate even closer to habitable areas,
sometimes hovering and thereby constituting a stationary noise source.
Traditionally, two methods have been used for measuring noise from airplanes on the ground: 1)
Pole-mounted microphones and 2) inverted microphones over a reflecting pane. This paper
evaluates these methods and investigates new standards for measuring noise from UASs.
The noise from smaller hovering UASs can be measured and studied in anechoic chambers,
which will provide a well-defined free field acoustic environment. For larger UASs, the size of
Page | 1

most anechoic chambers may be too small and may incur problems with recirculation and safety.
It may therefore be necessary to perform the measurements at an outdoor test site where it will
not be possible to obtain a free field as in the anechoic chamber because the ground will act as
a reflecting plane.
Traditional aircraft noise measurements as, for example, described in ICAO Annex 16 [1] or ISO
20906 [2], are performed with a microphone mounted at some distance above the ground, and
the results from such measurements will be influenced by the reflections from the ground
impedance. This may provide a good estimate of the overall A-weighted sound pressure level for
an aircraft flying over the measurement position. However, for detailed studies of the frequency
content and for hover conditions, this method may lead to considerable errors.
This issue has been recognized in ICAO Annex 16 [1], as the method for helicopter test is
performed with a microphone mounted on a plate with a well-defined impedance. The inverted
microphone technique described in ICAO Annex 16 [1] is, however, limited to frequencies below
10 kHz. This may be relevant for traditional aircraft, which are typically operated at relatively large
distances from observers, and the attenuation of high frequencies by the air will eliminate the
problem with high frequencies. However, many UASs are intended for operation closer to
observers and high frequencies may not be attenuated before reaching an observer and
therefore need to be considered.

2. Aircraft noise measurements
2.1 Microphone over a reflecting plane
Traditional aircraft noise measurements are performed with a microphone positioned at a height
of 1.2 m, as described in for example ICAO Annex 16 Volume 1 Appendix 1, 3.5.1 [1], illustrated
in
Figure
1.
Sound source

Hover condition

Direct wave
Microphone

Reflected
wave

h

Ground Z
Figure 1. Microphone at height h with sound source above

Page | 2

This introduces interference between the direct wave and the reflected wave at the microphone
position [3]. If the sound source emits pink noise and is directly above the microphone, the
resulting spectra at the microphone position will be as shown as the orange curve in Figure 2,
where the blue curve indicates the corresponding free-field level at the microphone position with
no ground reflection. (It should be noted that the following calculations are idealized simulations
and that actual measurements would give less well-defined effects at high frequencies due to
scattering, impedance changes and other factors resulting in lower spatial correlation).

Figure 2. FFT spectra for pink noise source directly above microphone (hover conditions)

The interference of the direct wave and the reflected wave at the microphone position is like a
comb filter, with the first minimum at the frequency where the microphone height 1.2 m equals
¼ of the wavelength:
𝑓𝑓0 =

𝑐𝑐
≈ 71.4 𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻
4 ∗ 𝑙𝑙

𝑓𝑓1 =

𝑐𝑐
≈ 143 𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻
2 ∗ 𝑙𝑙

And the first maximum at

This can be seen more clearly using 1/24-octave filtering as in Figure 3:

Page | 3

λ/4 -72 Hz

λ/2 - 143 Hz

Full ground reflection

No reflection
Free-field condition

Figure 3. 1/24-octave spectra for pink noise source directly above microphone (hover conditions)

Using 1/3-octave filtering, the effect of the comb-filtering will be further smoothed at higher
frequencies, as shown in Figure 4. This shows a 1/3-octave spectra for pink-noise source directly
above the microphone (hover conditions), where the frequencies coincident with the comb-filter
minima are reduced by more than 20 dB, and the frequencies coincident with the comb-filter
maxima are amplified by 6 dB. It may be possible to correct the frequencies amplified by the
maxima, but it is more difficult to correct the frequency components reduced by the comb filter,
as they often may be reduced below the general broadband noise level.
It should be noted that the overall sound pressure level measured at 1.2 m height will be 3 dB
higher than the corresponding level measured in a full free field as for example inside an anechoic
chamber; therefore, it is important to consider the specific circumstances of the actual
measurement before comparing levels.

λ/4

Full ground
reflection

λ/2

Comb-filter effect smoothed
by 1/3-octave filter

No reflection
free-field condition

Figure 4. 1/3-octave spectra for pink-noise source directly above microphone (hover conditions)

Page | 4

In practice it may be possible to correct the data for the comb-filtering effect as long as the source
signal is broadband noise. However, if the source signal contains pure tone components, it will
not be possible to do this correction. Figure 5 shows an example where the source signal contains
pure tone frequencies at 72 Hz and higher harmonics.
λ/4

λ/2

Figure 5. 1/24-octave spectra of 72 Hz, 143 Hz, 215 Hz, 286 Hz and 357 Hz in free field

When this signal is filtered by the comb filter created by the 1.2 m height interference, the
resulting spectra will be as seen in Figure 6.

+6dB by comb filter

Removed by comb filter

Figure 6. 1/24-octave spectra for pure tone source directly above microphone (hover conditions), blue curve: free field, orange
curve: ground reflection 1.2 m

Page | 5

The examples above have assumed a perfectly reflecting ground surface, and this condition may
be fulfilled inside a semi-anechoic room with hard concrete floor or in an outside site with similar
hard reflecting ground surface. Many outdoor measurement sites may have ground surfaces like
gravel, grass or hard soil—not perfectly reflecting. The ground impedance can be modelled as a
porous layer (Delany-Bazley-Miki) [4] with flow resistivity between 30 kPa*s/m2 and 30 MPa*s/m2.
Figure 7 shows the simulation (COMSOL BEM) of the sound field above reflecting ground
surfaces with different flow resistivity.

Figure 7. Sound pressure level above ground for different flow resistivities at 1 kHz

At 1.2 m height the influence of the ground reflection is considerable even with a ground flow
resistivity of 30 kPa*s/m2 corresponding to something like very soft forest ground covered with
moss. It can also be seen that moving the microphone closer to the ground surface will further
increase the influence of the ground reflection, and even very soft ground surfaces will not
prevent the interference.
The hover situation, with the sound source directly above the microphone position, is the worst
as far as interference between the direct and reflected wave. For a fly-by measurement, the
elevation angle as defined in Figure 8 will vary continuously from 0° to 180°, with 90°
corresponding to the source being right above the microphone, as in the hover example above.

Page | 6

Figure 8. Elevation angle for source over microphone

As the angle varies, the distance travelled by the direct and the reflected wave will change, and
this will change the comb-filter effect as illustrated in Figure 9.

Figure 9. Comb-filtering effect for different elevation angles for microphone height 1.2m and source height 10 m.

2.2 Ground board measurements with inverted microphone
ICAO Annex 16 Volume I, Appendix 6 [1] for propeller-driven airplanes not exceeding 8,618 kg,
uses a ground board microphone configuration as shown in Figure 10. This is explained further
in ICAO Environmental Technical Manual, Volume I, Procedures for the Noise Certification of
Aircraft: “The specified ground plane microphone configuration greatly minimizes the interference
effects of reflected sound waves inherent in pole-mounted microphone installations. For a 1.2 m
Page | 7

(4 ft) microphone, such effects typically occur in the frequency region that is most significant for
propeller-driven aircraft noise”. [5]

Figure 10. ICAO ground plane microphone configuration

The resulting sound field on the surface of the ground plate depends on the impedance of the
surrounding ground and the angle of incidence for the incoming sound waves [6]. For a 90°
elevation, where the sound source is directly above the plate, the pressure distribution on the
plate is as shown in Figure 11.

Figure 11. SPL on plate and surrounding ground for 90° incidence with 250 kPa's/m2 (a) 500 Hz, (b) 1 kHz, (c) 2 kHz) and (d) 8
kHz

The SPL pressure distributions on the ground board was calculated for a free-field sound
pressure level of 94 dB, and it can be seen that while the SPL on the ground surface decreases
at higher frequencies due the absorption, the pressure on the plate is almost constant at 100 dB,
corresponding to a pressure doubling from the free-field condition. It can also be seen that the
center point of the plate is not the optimum position. Figure 12 shows the spectra calculated in
Page | 8

the center position (blue curve) compared to the spectra in the microphone position at r=0.15 m,
as specified in Figure 10.

Figure 12. Frequency response for 90° incidence at center point and at a point at r=0.15 m

The ICAO microphone configuration used for propeller-driven aeroplanes not exceeding 8,618kg
in Figure 10 has the draw-backs in that it is very sensitive to changes in the distance between
the ground plate and the microphone diaphragm as shown in Figure 13. This might be
problematic in the field when a last-minute calibration is required to validate the measurement
chains.

Figure 13. ½″ Inverted microphone over ground plate with 7 mm distance (green curve), 4 mm distance (blue curve) and 9.6 mm distance
(red curve)

Secondly, the inverted microphone mounted on top of the reflecting plate disturbs the
measurements above 10 kHz. The influence of different-sized microphones can be seen from
Figure 14. The graph shows the influence of different-sized microphones mounted upside-down
above the ground plate compared to a reference microphone mounted flush on the plate.
Page | 9

⅛″
¼″
½″

Figure 14. Influence of ⅛″, ¼″ and ½″ microphones mounted upside-down above the ground plate compared to a reference microphone
mounted flush on the plate

2.3 Ground board measurements with flush-mounted microphones
For traditional aircraft, the high-frequency content above 10 kHz may not be of particular interest,
as the aircraft are normally far away, where the atmospheric absorption will reduce the high
frequencies before they reach an observer. Typical drones may however be operated closer to
observers, and it may not be justified to ignore the high-frequency content. To configure a setup
where the ground reflections are avoided and where no inverted microphone disturbs the
measurements above 10 kHz, the microphone must be flush mounted with the plate surface, as
shown in Figure 15. This will increase the frequency range up to 20 kHz and thus allow
measurement of the high-frequency content.

-

Figure 15. Ground board plate with flush-mounted microphone

Conclusions

Page | 10

A free-field measurement in a fully anechoic chamber enables accurate measurements of the full
spectral content of the device under test for both broadband noise sources and for noise sources
containing pure tone sources. For outdoor measurements, which include ground reflections, and
for semi-anechoic chamber measurements, the overall level of a broadband noise source can be
obtained, with microphones at a certain height, but in general the level obtained with this method
will be 3 dB higher than the free-field condition.
If the microphone, instead of mounted at a certain height, is flush mounted with a fully reflecting
ground, both broadband noise sources and pure tone sources can be measured, but with a 6 dB
higher level than for the free-field situation.
As larger jet airplanes move along a flight track at almost constant speed at a considerable
distance from the measurement point, the tonal content of the noise is reduced due to the
distance, and the constant movement of the source minimizes the comb effect. The interference
from the reflecting wave is therefore neglectable, and the measurements are repeatable for this
kind of noise source.
As lighter aircraft do not follow the same predefined flight tracks and as they fly at lower altitudes,
the interference from the ground is no longer neglectable, and a ground plate with an inverted
microphone should be used. This ensures a repeatable measurement for frequencies below 10
kHz. As the inverted microphone is mounted in the sound field, the sensor influences
measurements above 10 kHz, and it is therefore not suitable for lightweight and small multirotor
unmanned aerial systems.
As some of the characteristics of the noise from UAVs/UASs are different from noise from larger
airplanes in relation to tonal content and higher frequency as well as lower altitude and stationary
source, the current standards for accurate measurement of noise on the ground are not optimal,
and a flush-mounted microphone on a ground plate is preferable. This configuration is useful for
stationary and non-stationary noise sources with frequencies up to 20 kHz, where the noise
contains tones.

References
1. ICAO Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation: Environmental
Protection: Volume 1—Aircraft Noise, International Civil Aviation Organization, July
2017.
2. ISO 20906: Acoustics—Unattended monitoring of aircraft sound in the vicinity of airports,
ISO, 2009.
3. T.D. Norum and C.H. Liu, “Point source moving above a finite impedance reflecting
plane—experiment and theory,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol.
63, 1069, 1978, doi: 10.1121/1.381839
4. K. Attenborough, I. Bashir and S.Taherzadeh, “Outdoor ground impedance models,” The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 129, 2806, 2011, doi:
10.1121/1.3569740
5. ICAO Environmental Technical Manual, Volume I, Procedures for the Noise Certification
of Aircraft, International Civil Aviation Organization, 2015.
6. W.L. Willshire, Jr. and P. Nystrom, “Investigation of Effects of Microphone Position and
Orientation on Near-ground Noise Measurements,” NASA Technical Paper, NASA, April
1982.
Page | 11

