PAPERS

Spatial Decomposition Method for Room Impulse
Responses
SAKARI TERVO, JUKKA PÄTYNEN, ANTTI KUUSINEN
(sakari.tervo@aalto.fi)

(jukka.pätynen@aalto.fi)

(antti.kuusinen@aalto.fi)

AND TAPIO LOKKI, AES Member
(tapio.lokki@aalto.fi)

Department of Media Technology, Aalto University School of Science, FI-00076 Aalto

This paper presents a spatial encoding method for room impulse responses. The method is
based on decomposing the spatial room impulse responses into a set of image-sources. The
resulting image-sources can be used for room acoustics analysis and for multichannel convolution reverberation engines. The analysis method is applicable for any compact microphone
array and the reproduction can be realized with any of the current spatial reproduction methods.
Listening test experiments with simulated impulse responses show that the proposed method
produces an auralization indistinguishable from the reference in the best case.

0 INTRODUCTION
Spatial sound encoding and reproduction techniques are
important tools for room acoustics research [1,2]. For perceptual evaluation of room acoustics, a spatial room impulse
response is first measured, then encoded for a multichannel loudspeaker reproduction system, and convolved with
anechoic music. This process of reproducing spatial sound
from a spatial room impulse response is illustrated in Fig. 1.
The last part of this spatial sound reproduction process is
typically called convolution reverb.
Previous research has presented several spatial encoding methods that can be applied for spatial impulse responses. The spatial encoding methods can be divided to
three groups according to their aim. In the first group the
aim is to reproduce the originally measured sound field
over a certain area. These methods include, First-Order
Ambisonics (1.OA), Higher-Order Ambisonics (HOA) [3],
and Wave-Field Synthesis (WFS) [4,5]. In contrast, in the
second group, the binaural reproduction methods, the intention is to reproduce the sound pressure correctly at listener’s eardrums by recording the soundfield close or at the
eardrum [6,7]. In the third group, the starting point is to
analyze and reproduce some of the spatial cues correctly
[8,9]. An example of an analysis method belonging to the
third group is the Spatial Room Impulse Response Rendering (SIRR) [10]. The first two groups require specialized
microphones or microphone arrays, whereas the methods
of the last group aim to present signal processing schemes
that are applicable, at least to some extent, for several miJ. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

crophone arrays. An advantage of the first two groups is that
they can be applied to a continous signal, such as speech
or music. It should be stated that this paper concentrates on
the spatial encoding of the spatial room impulse responses,
not continuous signals.
Most of the professionals working in the field will agree,
that when applied in a careful manner, any of the aforementioned encoding techniques will provide a realistic or
at least plausible auralization of the acoustics. However, the
use of special microphone arrays imposes limitations to the
measurement procedure. First, some of the microphones
are known to have inaccurate directional response, especially in the higher frequencies, which naturally affects the
accuracy of the analysis and the reproduction. Second, the
measurement, especially for WFS, either requires a multitude of microphones or is time consuming, which can be
costly. Finally, the microphone array setups for some of the
reproduction approaches are only limited to that specific
approach.
This paper presents a spatial encoding technique for spatial room impulse responses, named here Spatial Decomposition Method (SDM). In contrast to previously developed
methods, SDM can be applied for an arbitrary compact microphone array with a small number of microphones and
any spatial sound reproduction technique. The presented
method relies upon the simple assumption that the sound
propagation direction is the average of all the waves arriving
to the microphone array at time t, and the sound pressure
of a single impulse response in the geometric center of the
array is associated with it. The method analyzes the spatial
17

TERVO ET AL.

PAPERS

direct sound, discrete reflections, diffractions, or diffuse
reflections. At each time moment t, the sound pressure at
receiving location r n has a scalar value, i.e., it is a scalar
function h(r n , x|t). The scalar value is the overall sum of
different sound pressure waves arriving at the same time to
the receiver location. In the context of this paper the spatial room impulse response is measured with n = 1, . . ., N
microphones, i.e., a microphone array.
The whole impulse response is altered by several acoustic
phenomena. A majority of the acoustic events is attenuated
according to 1/r-law and affected by air absorption. In addition, the frequency response of an event is altered by the
absorption of the surfaces in the enclosure. Moreover, the
directivities of the microphones and the sound source have
an effect on the impulse response.
As time progresses, the number of acoustic events per
time window increases. In room acoustics research and
convolution reverberation engines, the impulse response is
traditionally divided into three consecutive regions in time:
the direct sound, the early reflections, and the late reverberation. Next subsections list features of these categories in
theory and in practice.

Room Impulse Response
Measurement or simulation

Microphone array

Microphone signals
. . .
Spatial analysis and
encoding, e.g.,
(SDM / SIRR / 1.OA / HOA)

Analysis and
synthesis

Encoded stream
. . .
Spatial decoding and
reproduction, e.g.,
(VBAP / 1.OA / HOA / WFS)
Loudspeaker signals
. . .

Spatially Reproduced
Acoustics

Convolution with anechoic
source signal
Convolved signals
. . .
.

.

.

Loudspeakers

Fig. 1. The general processing applied in auralization using room
impulse response measurements or simulations. The acronyms for
the encoding and decoding techniques are given in the text.

impulse response with this assumption and encodes it to a
response that consists of samples that have a pressure value
and a spatial location.
1 THEORY AND METHODS
This section presents theoretical background on the spatial room impulse response and the proposed spatial analysis.
1.1 Room Impulse Response
A room impulse responses captured with a microphones
n at location r n is the sum of individual acoustic events
hp,n (t):


P
#
!
h n (t) = h(t|r n , x) = 
h p,n (t) + wn (t)
=

& l '(
∞
#
l=0

−∞

p=0

H p,n (ω)e

jωt

dω

)*

+ wn (t),

(1)

where n denotes microphone index, t is time, ω is the angular frequency, x is the source position, p = 0, . . . , P is
the index for each acoustic event, wn (t) is the measurement
noise, and Hp,n (ω) is the frequency domain representation
of hp,n (t). The acoustic events can be, for example, the
18

1.1.1 Direct Sound, Specular and Diffuse
Reflections, and Diffraction
In theory, the direct sound is a single impulse, i.e., a
Dirac delta function. Moreover, with the assumption of
ideal reflecting surfaces, the reflections are also impulses.
In practice, ideal specular reflections are rare, since they
require an infinite rigid and flat plane. Thus, the early reflections are often spread over time instead of being single
events in the impulse response and have a certain frequency
response due to the absorption at the boundaries. Also, due
to the non-ideal response of the loudspeakers and microphones, the direct sound is not an impulse. Moreover, the
loudspeaker impulse response is typically different in all
directions, therefore, reflections from different directions
have different responses in time and frequency.
The concept of image-source describes an ideally specular reflection from a surface [11]. Although such reflections
are rare or not even possible in real situations, the model can
be used to describe several acoustic events. First, the diffraction from an edge can be modeled with properly weighted
image-sources [12]. Second, non-ideal reflections, i.e., diffuse reflections, are caused by diffraction in a very small
scale [13]. Third, close-to-ideal specular reflections and the
direct sound can be modeled with a limited number of properly weighted image-sources and a source, respectively.
Thus, it can be concluded that the acoustics of an enclosure
can be modeled to some extent with a limited number of
image-sources. However, in practice, the acoustic modeling
of complex room geometries with image-sources is a very
demanding task.
1.1.2 Late Reverberation
The reflection density increases in the room impulse response as the time progresses. When enough reflections
arrive during the same time, the sound field becomes
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

PAPERS

SPATIAL DECOMPOSITION METHOD

Fig. 2. The processing in the proposed spatial encoding method consists of localization and combining the omni-directional pressure
signal with the estimated locations.

diffuse. A diffuse sound field is spatially homogeneous
and isotropic. In practice, this means that the distributions
of the phase and direction are uniform and amplitude is
equally distributed for each position. It follows from these
conditions that the net energy flow over a volume is zero.
The time when this occurs in an impulse response is typically referred to as the mixing time [14], and after that the
impulse response is considered to be late reverberation.
1.2 Analysis
SDM assumes that the impulse response can be presented
as a set of limited number of image-sources. SDM analyzes the spatial room impulse response at every discrete
time step !t = 1/fs , where fs is the sampling frequency.
The sound arriving during these time windows has an average direction that is estimated with robust localization
methods. As a result, a set of discrete pressure values and
their corresponding locations, i.e., image-sources, present
the spatial room impulse response. Decomposition of the
image-sources describes this process and thus the name
SDM (Spatial Decomposition Method). The overall processing in the method is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The analysis assumes the following general requirements
for the used microphone array:
• For 3-D spatial sound encoding, the minimum requirement of the number of microphones is four, which are
not on the same plane, so that they can set up a 3-D
space.
• The directivity of one of the microphones is omnidirectional or it is possible to create one virtual omnidirectional pressure microphone signal from the others.
• The dimensions of the array are not large, i.e., the microphone array is compact. The dimensions should be
less or equal to the dimensions of a human head.
• Open microphone arrays are preferred, but closed ones
can also be used as long as the above requirements are
met.
In detail, for a set of room impulse responses H(t) =
N
, i.e., a spatial room impulse response, the anal{h n (t)}n=1
ysis proceeds as follows.
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

1.2.1 Step 1: Localization
First, SDM solves the location of the source and imagesources from the spatial room impulse response. For each
discrete time step, a localization function P(· | · ) estimates
the average location of the arriving sound in a small time
window with respect to the geometric center of the array.
The localization function maps the received data into a
cost function that is given for a location x and possible
parameters or a priori models χ:
x̂ k = arg max{P(H(k)|x, χ)},
x

(2)

where H(k) is the spatial impulse response in a short time
window that is defined by vector k = [−L/2 + k . . . L/2 +
k]!t with discrete time indices at time !tk, k = 1. . .K,
where K is the length of the impulse response, and window
size L.
The a priori models and the localization function depends
on the applied microphone array, measurement conditions,
and assumption on the sound field propagation model. As
an example for an arbitrary array with arbitrary directivities,
one can apply the maximum likelihood estimation given in
[15] with the reverberation parameter set to γ = 0. For
acoustic vector-sensors, e.g., a gradient microphone array,
one can apply the solutions given in [16] or [17]. Moreover,
[18] gives an overview of different localization functions
that are based on time difference of arrival and time of
arrival estimation. The accuracy of the localization depends
on the applied microphone array and localization method,
as well as on the conditions during the measurements.
This paper uses the least squares solution for time difference of arrival estimates (TDOA) for localizing the imagesources. Plane-wave propagation model is assumed for the
localization since an efficient estimator for the problem exists, unlike for spherical wave propagation model [19] and
since the source and the image-sources can be assumed to be
in the far field. Although the solution is a set of plane-waves
instead of a set of image-sources, the method can treat them
in a similar manner due to the far-field assumption.
The TDOAs are obtained from generalized correlation
method with direct weighting [20] for each time step in the
small analysis window k. In addition, each TDOA estimate
19

TERVO ET AL.

PAPERS

is interpolated with the exponential fit [21]. The TDOA
estimates are denoted with
(k)
(k)
T
τ̂ k = [τ̂(k)
1,2 , τ̂1,3 , . . . , τ̂ N −1,N ] ,

where N is the number of microphones, and the corresponding microphone position difference vectors are denoted with
V = [r 1 − r 2 , r 1 − r 3 , . . . , r N −1 − r N ]T .
The least squares solution for slowness vector is then given
as [22, p. 75]:
m̂k = V + τ̂ k ,

(3)

where (·)+ is Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse, and the
direction of the arriving sound wave is given as
n̂k = −m̂k /$m̂k $. The distance to the image-source k is
given directly by the time index and the speed of sound dk
= ck!t.

1.2.2 Step 2: Dividing the Omni-Directional
Pressure Signal
The second step of the analysis selects one of the available omni-directional microphone signals as the pressure
signal hp . Ideally, the microphone for the pressure signal
is located in the geometric center of the array. In this case,
the analysis assigns each sample of the pressure impulse
response hp (!tk) with a 3-D location x̂ k , which is the output from Step 1. Then, the method has encoded the spatial
impulse response with four values per sample, the pressure
value and the 3-D location of the sample.
In case the pressure microphone is not in the geometric
center of the array, one has to predict the value of the
pressure signal according to the image-source locations.
This is done by first calculating the distance from the imagesource location to the location of the pressure microphone
rp
dk = $r p − x k $,

(4)

and then assigning each image-source with the pressure value hp (fs dk /c). When using plane wave propagation
model, the distance is calculated as
dk = |nk (r p − x k,0 )|,

(5)

where nk and x k,0 are the plane normal and a point on the
plane, respectively.
Instead of predicting the pressure in the center of the
array, one can predict the image-source locations in the
location of the pressure signal. This is an easier choice
because it does not require resampling of the signal. This
paper applies neither of these approaches, since the pressure
microphone is always located in the middle.
1.3 Limitations on the Performance and the
Effect of the Window Size
Several aspects affect the accuracy of the analysis in
SDM. When the noise level decreases and the number of
microphones increases, the performance of the localization
improves, as predicted by the Cramér-Rao lower bound
(CRLB) (see, e.g., [18]). Other important factors are the
20

time interval between the samples (!t) and the size or the
dimensions of the microphone array. The smaller these values are the more spatial and temporal separation between
individual acoustic events can be made. This improves the
localization for individual acoustic events. Other methods
require larger aperture size to improve the approximations
for low frequencies, however, in SDM this is not a requirement since in SDM the lower frequencies can be estimated
by elongating the window size. However, this would also
require that SDM processing is done for different frequency
bands with different window sizes. This is further discussed
in Section 4.1.
A limiting factor for the window size is the largest dimension of the microphone array. That is, the window size
should be larger than the time that it takes for a sound wave
to travel through the array, i.e., L!t > 2dmax /c, where dmax
is the maximum distance between any two microphones
in the array. Theoretically, a large window size improves
and worsens the localization performance at the same time.
Namely, as the window size increases, the localization performance of a single acoustic event improves, as stated by
the CRLB. However, the probability that more than one
acoustic event is present in the analysis window increases.
This latter part is seen as a possible problem in the analysis
and, therefore, it is recommended that the window size is
selected such that it is just over 2dmax c. In addition, if an
acoustic event is assumed to be short, time-wise, increasing the window size would actually decrease the theoretical performance since the energy of the noise in the time
window increases relative to the energy of the signal, thus
decreasing the signal-to-noise ratio.
The next part assesses the effect of the window size
selection with a quantity called echo density. The echo
density describes the average number of echoes in a room
per a time instant and is valid for any arbitrarily shaped
enclosure [23, p. 92]. It is defined as
c3 t 2
Nr
= 4π
,
dt
V

(6)

where Nr is the number of reflections, and V is volume.
Echo density is a useful tool for inspecting the effects of
the window size selection on the number of acoustic events,
i.e., image-sources, per time window. The threshold when
there is less than Nr reflection(s) present in the time window
can be examined with
+
√
Nr V
τ1 =
≈
0.0014
V.
(7)
dt4πc3
The last approximation is yielded for less than one reflection Nr → 1 and assuming that the speed of sound is constant c = 345 m/s. For example, a window size of dt =
L!t = 1 ms produces the value τ1 = 119 ms for a room
with volume (30 × 20 × 12 = 7200 m3 ), which indicates
that there is only one acoustic event present in the analysis window until 119 ms after the direct sound. Thus, the
parameter τ1 describes the average time when there will
be more than one reflection present in the analysis time
window. The smaller the window size, the bigger the parameter τ1 and the more accurate localization of individual
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

PAPERS

SPATIAL DECOMPOSITION METHOD

acoustic events is achieved. To conclude, shorter time windows should be preferred over long ones, and the minimum
length of the time window is defined by the maximum of
the spacing between any microphone pair.

1.5 An Example of the Analysis with SDM
This section demonstrates the principles in SDM with
an illustration of analysis results of spatial room impulse
response. The spatial room impulse response is recorded
from a simulation of a shoebox room of size (20 × 30 ×
12) m3 . Furthermore, the source was at [16.04, 8.06, 3.58]
m and the receiver at [7.35, 7.92, 3.22] m. In addition, the
applied window was 1.33 ms Hanning window and overlap
between two consecutive windows is 99%. Speed of sound
was set to c = 345 m/s, sampling frequency to fs = 48 kHz,
reflection coefficient to 0.85, and reflections up to 45th order
were simulated.
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

Y−coordinate [m]

50

0

−50

−100
−100

−50

0
X−coordinate [m]

50

100

(a) Original image-source locations and amplitudes.
100

50
Y−coordinate [m]

1.4 Rationale for SDM
The accurate localization of first acoustic events with
respect to time in the impulse responses, i.e., the direct
sound and the first reflections, is possible as shown in [24]
and [18], respectively. However, as the time progresses the
number of acoustic events per time window increases, and
eventually more than one reflection arrives during the time
window. In this case, a cross-correlation-based localization algorithm localizes the sound to the location of the
reflection that is the strongest one in that time window.
The strongest direction is selected because it shows as the
strongest peak in the cross-correlation functions. Analogous example of this behavior with one localization algorithm is shown with speech sources in [25]. However, it is
also possible that the estimated location is an intermediate
point that is between the reflections within that analysis
window. This is, for example, the case if the localization
algorithm is based on the average direction of the sound
intensity. Thus, the estimated location depends highly on
the localization algorithm. The behavior of the localization
algorithms in the case of several acoustic events should be
further investigated, but here this is left for future research.
In any case, SDM assumes in the spatial reproduction that
the estimated location corresponds to the correct perceptual location. The assumption has been used previously for
example in SIRR [10,26].
SDM produces the diffuse sound field naturally. Namely,
in SDM each time step has a random direction in a diffuse
sound field. The total directional distribution over the total
diffuse sound field, i.e., late reverberation is then uniform.
Further evidence for this is provided in a recently published
article which uses SDM for spatial analysis [27].
Since the first acoustic events are correctly localized from
spatial room impulse response in the SDM framework, and
these events are known to have a very prominent effect on
the perception of spatial sound [1,28], the resulting auralization should be credible. Moreover, the late part of the
spatial room impulse response will be naturally presented
as diffuse by SDM because multiple arriving reflections
will produce random directions.

100

0

−50

−100
−100

−50

0
X−coordinate [m]

50

100

(b) Analyzed image-source locations and amplitudes
Fig. 3. An example of the locations and amplitudes of (a) simulated image-sources and (b) decomposed image-sources with
SDM from a spatial room impulse response. The area of each
filled circle illustrates the energy of that image-source. The imagesources with the highest energy are correctly analyzed.

Fig. 3, where the radius of each circle corresponds to the
amplitude of respective image-source, illustrates the results
of the analysis. As can be seen in Fig. 3, the early part of the
simulated spatial room impulse response (a) is very similar
to the one analyzed by SDM (b).
2 LISTENING TEST EXPERIMENTS
This section describes the listening test setup, the listening room, the simulated room acoustic conditions, and the
source signals. In addition, listening test procedures and
results are presented.
This paper uses Vector Base Amplitude Panning (VBAP)
[8] as the spatial reproduction technique for the listening
tests. Other reproduction methods could also be used, but
VBAP is here preferred since it can be implemented for a
3-D spatial sound with less number of loudspeakers than
the other methods and since it provides good subjective
quality in overall. The listening tests compares the proposed method to SIRR [10,26], which can be considered the
21

TERVO ET AL.

PAPERS

Table 1. Reverberation time (RT), sound pressure level (SPL),
and noise level (NL) in the listening room. Sound pressure level
is given with respect to the reference (Ref.) value at 200 Hz4 kHz frequency band. In the calibration, the SPL was 87 dB,
which gives a signal-to-noise ratio of more than 45 dB for each
octave band.
Octave band

RT [s]

SPL [dB]

NL [dB]

Ref. [200 Hz - 4 kHz]
125 [Hz]
250 [Hz]
500 [Hz]
1 [kHz]
2 [kHz]
4 [kHz]
8 [kHz]

0.14
0.24
0.17
0.13
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.10

0.00
1.66
0.47
0.36
0.02
0.16
−1.03
−2.93

39.9
35.7
32.9
28.6
20.4
18.9
21.5

Table 2. The azimuth and elevation directions and distance of
each individual loudspeaker (LPS) in the 14-channel loudspeaker
reproduction setup in the listening room. 8, 4, and 2
loudspeakers are located approximately at the lateral plane, 45
degrees above lateral plane, and –45 degrees below lateral plane,
respectively. The loudspeakers were localized using the method
presented in [24].
LPS #

Azimuth [◦ ]

Elevation [◦ ]

Distance [m]

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

46.7
89.6
134.2
179.8
−135.9
−91.6
−45.6
−0.3
45.9
135.1
−137.9
−45.4
24.0
−19.6

0.1
−1.5
−0.1
−0.2
0.1
0.2
1.0
1.6
43.5
40.5
42.3
46.4
−46.1
−45.1

1.01
1.02
0.98
0.95
1.02
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.30
1.33
1.40
1.33
1.29
1.27

state-of-the-art spatial sound encoding method for spatial
room impulse responses, at least for VBAP. SIRR also operates under the same assumption as SDM, that the binaural
cues are produced correctly.
2.1 Listening Room Setup and Stimuli
Listening tests were conducted in an acoustically treated
room with dimensions of (x × y × z : 3.0 × 5.1 × 3.8) m3 .
Table 1 shows the reverberation time, sound pressure level,
and noise level in the listening room. The listening room
fulfills the recommendations given by ITU in [29], with
the exceptions that the noise level fulfills the noise rating
(NR) 30 requirement, whereas the recommendation is NR
15 and the listening distance is about 1.2 meters on average,
whereas the recommendation is more than two meters.
The listening room includes a 3-D 14-channel loudspeaker setup, out of which 12 are of type Genelec 8030A,
and two are of type Genelec 1029A loudspeakers. Table 2
gives the location of each loudspeaker with respect to the
listening position at the origin (0,0,0) m. Each loudspeaker
is calibrated so that they produce equal A-weighted sound
22

Table 3. Source and receiver positions, source signals,
dimensions of the rooms, and sample naming used in the
listening test. Speed of sound was set to c = 345 m/s, sampling
frequency to fs = 48 kHz, reflection coefficient to 0.85, and
reflections up to 45th order were simulated.
Sample
(Signal)
A (Sp.)
B (Tr.)
C (Ca.)
D (Sp.)
E (Tr.)
F (Ca.)

Source position
x [m]

y [m]

z [m]

Receiver position
x [m]

y [m]

Large room (30 × 20 × 12) m3
16.04
8.06
3.58
7.35
7.92
17.44
12.81
2.88
2.64
13.48
20.37
11.99
2.52
3.10
12.10
Small room (5 × 3 × 2.8) m3
3.44
0.80
1.53
1.02
0.64
3.87
1.45
1.65
0.76
1.39
3.78
0.85
1.81
1.24
0.97

z [m]
3.22
3.72
2.86
1.40
1.33
2.07

Sp.: Speech, Tr. Trombone, and Ca.: Castanet

pressure level with slow temporal averaging in the listening position for a band-pass filtered noise from 100 Hz to
5 kHz. Since the distance of the loudspeakers is not the
same to the reference position for all loudspeakers, they
are all delayed with digital signal processing so that each
loudspeaker is at a virtual distance of 1.40 m.
The simulated impulse responses for the listening test
were produced with the image-source method [11] in two
modelled rectangular rooms. In the image-source method,
throughout this paper, the reflection coefficient is set to
0.85, the speed of sound to 345 m/s, the sampling frequency
to 48 kHz, and reflections up to 45th order are simulated. In
addition, Table 3 shows the room dimensions, source, and
receiver positions used in the image-source method. Two
shoebox rooms, a large and a small one, are simulated for
the listening tests. The large and the small room have wide
band reverberation times of 2.0 s and 0.4 s, respectively.
In all the cases, the room impulse responses are truncated
from –40 dB onwards according to the backward integrated
Schroeder curve.

2.1.1 Reference and Anchor
The reference was generated with the image-source
method. The location and amplitude of each image-source
was transferred into a virtual source, which was panned
with VBAP for the current loudspeaker setup [8]. Finally,
to simulate a real room impulse response measurement situation, the anechoic impulse response of Genelec 1029A was
convolved with the impulse responses, and the impulse response was filtered with air absorption filters, implemented
according to [30].
The anchor for the listening test was selected to be the
same mono impulse response as in the reference but instead
of VBAP processing according to the directional information obtained from the image-source method, it was used
directly in the front loudspeaker (# 8 in Table 2).
2.1.2 Spatial Encoding Methods
Similarly to the reference, the image-source method was
used to generate spatial impulse responses for a virtual
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

PAPERS

SPATIAL DECOMPOSITION METHOD

W
X
B-format
conversion Y
Z

VBAP

Non-diffuse stream
SIRR

Diffuse stream
Decorrelation

Source Response filter
Air absorption filter

Convolution with source signal

Air absorption filter

VBAP

x(t), y(t), z(t), h(t)

...

VBAP

...

Extracted image source locations
and pressure signal

...

Monaural impulse response and spatial metadata

SDM

...

...

Image source
method

Loudspeaker signals

...

...

...

Source Response filter

Microphone signals
Room parameters
Microphone array
-room dimensions
-source position
-sampling frequency, 48 kHz
-reflection coefficient, 0.85
-speed of sound, 345 m/s
-reflection order, 45

Fig. 4. Processing of the samples in the listening test experiments. The shaded areas highlight the different spatial encoding methods
(from top to down, SDM, SIRR and reference).
Table 4. Origin centered coordinates for the microphone arrays.
Spacing dspc is equal for each microphone pair on a single axis.
Microphone #

X [m]

Y [m]

Z [m]

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

dspc /2
−dspc /2
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
dspc /2
−dspc /2
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
dspc /2
−dspc /2
0

microphone array. The microphone array consists of seven
microphones, of which six are on a sphere and one in the
geometric center of the array, as shown in Table 4. The
central microphone is used as the microphone for the pressure signal in the spatial encoding methods.
The proposed spatial encoding method, SDM, was compared to two versions of SIRR. The first version of SIRR, as
well as SDM, was implemented with seven microphones,
and the second version of SIRR was implemented with 13
microphones. Their naming is the following:
• SDM with a single microphone array with spacing dspc =
100 mm and one microphone in the geometric center is
named SDML7,
• SIRR with a single microphone array with spacing
dspc = 100 mm and one microphone in the geometric
center is named SIRRL7, and
• SIRR with two microphone arrays with spacings dspc =
100 mm and dspc = 25 mm and one microphone in the
geometric center is named SIRR13.
The microphone arrays were selected as such, since
SIRR-processing can be implemented for them [10,26].
Namely, SIRR requires the three components of particle velocity, which can be calculated with the gradient
microphone-technique and a pressure signal, which is the
microphone in the geometric center.
SIRR13 analyzes separately the room impulse responses
for large and small spacing and in the post-processing phase
combines them. Combination adds the analysis result for
low frequencies below 1 kHz from the large spacer, and
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

for high frequencies above 1 kHz with the smaller spacer.
Before the addition, the analyzed signals for small and large
spacer are low-pass and high-pass filtered with a 10th order
Butterworth IIR filter, respectively. The motivation for such
processing is that the present authors have used such array
in measurements of concert halls [31].
To compare the methods in the same conditions, all the
analyses use a Hanning window of 1.33 ms (64 samples
at 48 kHz). SIRR has an overlap of 50% between two
consecutive windows, and SDM has an overlap of 99%
(63 samples), as explained in Section 2.2 (Step 1). The
window size was selected as 1.33 ms since it is the one used
in the original SIRR paper [26]. It should be emphasized
that for SDM the optimal window size is much smaller
than the selected one. Especially for the smaller simulated
room, it is expected that the lengthy time window causes
problem in SDM, since parameter τ1 is 1.4 ms. However,
since the goal is to compare these two techniques in the
same conditions, the same window size is used for both.
Moreover, a virtual microphone-based synthesis, originally
developed for DirAC in [32], was noticed to provide a more
natural sound for SIRR and was included in the processing.
The output of the SDM, i.e., the extracted image-sources,
are directly panned with VBAP for the current loudspeaker
setup. The output of the SIRR-analysis is processed as described in [10] and [26] for VBAP reproduction. In addition,
the diffuse part of the SIRR is implemented with the Hybrid
Method described in [26]. The processing of the listening
test samples for SDM, SIRR, and the reference case are
illustrated in Fig. 4.

2.1.3 Source Signals and Test Samples
Approximately ten seconds of male speech, trombone,
and castanets were selected as the source signals. Each
sample was convolved separately with the corresponding
14-channel VBAP output for a reference, SIRR, or SDM.
The test samples are named from A to F as indicated in
Table 3.
2.2 Listening Test Procedure
The task in the listening test is to compare the “similarity”
of the spatially encoded samples with the reference sample,
23

TERVO ET AL.

PAPERS
A: Speech,
large ro om
B : Trom bone,
large ro om
C: Castanet,
large ro om
D: Trom bone,
sm a ll ro o m
E: Speech,
sm a ll ro o m
F: Ca sta net,
sm a ll ro o m

1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Sim ila rity

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
A B C D E F
Ref.

Fig. 5. Screen capture of the user interface (UI) used in the
listening tests. The subjects can freely move, listen to, and rate the
samples. Note that in the UI the alphabet stands for “method.”

instead of “impairment” recommended by ITU [29]. This
deviation from the ITU-recommendation was made since
the test subjects are not encouraged to think that the samples
are somehow impaired. In addition, the ITU-recommended
impairment scale (imperceptible; perceptible, but not annoying; slightly annoying; annoying; very annoying) is not
used in the listening test, since it is known from previous
research [26] that SIRR-processed samples sound quite natural and are quite similar to the reference. Thus, the idea
of this listening test is to find out which encoding method
produces the sound that is most similar with the reference.
The listening test was implemented as a parallel comparison with continuous scale, and the task was to compare
the similarity of five samples to a reference sample. Test
subjects completed the test twice. The order of the test
cases A – F (Table 3) was randomized between subjects
and repetitions. Also, in each test case, the five samples
(Ref., Anchor, SIRR13, SIRR7, SDML7) were presented
in a random order with letters A – E. A screen shot of
the user-interface and one comparative evaluation of one
test case is shown in Fig. 5. During the listening test, the
subjects could freely loop a time window what they were
listening to and listen to an unlimited number of times. That
is, there was no time limit for completing the test.
In the beginning of the test, the subjects had an adequate
time to familiarize themselves with the samples. The test
subjects were instructed to carefully consider the timbral
and the spatial aspects in the samples. They were also told
that one of the five samples is the hidden reference sample and one other sample is a mono anchor sample, which
is played back from the front loudspeaker. After the familiarization, the subjects rated the samples according to
similarity to the reference in the actual listening test. When
the test ended, the subjects were interviewed and asked for
the attributes that they used for discriminating and rating
the samples.
Seventeen test subjects with normal hearing participated
in the test. None of the subjects were the present authors of
24

A B C D E F
SDM L7

A B C D E F
SIRRL7

A B C D E F
SIRR13

A B C D E F
Anchor

Fig. 6. Listening test results, the thicker boxes with solid color
illustrate the 25 and 75 percentiles, the thinner lines illustrate the
most extreme data points, the circles outside the boxes illustrate
outliers, and the dots the median.

this paper. Most (9/17) of the test subjects can be considered
expert listeners in spatial audio due to their background in
spatial audio research. Others (3/17) had experience on critical listening, but this was not necessarily on spatial audio.
These subjects were considered as experienced listeners.
The rest (5/17) were naı̈ve test subjects and had limited or
no experience in critical listening. The test took on average approximately 50 minutes, including approximately a
10-minute familiarization step and a 5-minute interview.
3 RESULTS
All the results from the listening tests are shown in Fig. 6.
The results from the listening tests are normalized for each
test case and subject between 0 and 1. As shown in Fig. 6,
the references and anchors are found correctly in most of
the cases. SDML7 is mistaken as the reference 12 times,
and the SIRR13 as the anchor once. This result already
suggests that SDML7 is well suited for spatial encoding.
Multi-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) is applied to
examine the main effects, and two- and three-factor interactions. The examined main effects are the spatial encoding
method (Method), repetition of the test case (Repetition),
the size of the room (Room), and the source sound sample
(Sound). To perform ANOVA, the cases should be independent, the variances equal (homoscedasticity), and the
residuals normally distributed. Here, the cases are assumed
to be independent but other assumptions for ANOVA, the
homoscedescacity and the normality of the residuals, are
next tested with statistical tests.
Levene’s test [33] shows that the variances between different test cases are significantly different. In addition,
Anderson-Darling test [34] indicates that the residuals are
not normally distributed. Both of these results are most
likely a consequence of the scale in the listening test. That
is, as shown in Fig. 6, the results for the reference and anchor sound condition are negatively and positively skewed,
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

PAPERS

SPATIAL DECOMPOSITION METHOD
A: Speech,
la rg e ro o m
B : Tro m bo ne,
la rg e ro o m
C: Ca sta net,
la rg e ro o m
D: Tro m bo ne,
sm a ll ro o m
E: Speech,
sm a ll ro o m
F: Ca sta net,
sm a ll ro o m

1

Sim ila rity

0.8

0.6

0.4

Table 5. The attributes that the subjects used for assessing the
similarity according to the interviews. Most of the attributes are
translated from Finnish to English.
Timbral aspects
Localization (×5), spatial impression (×4), the amount of
reverberation (×4), distance (×3), spatial width,
spaciousness, gating effect, perception of room size,
reverberation time, artifacts in the reverberation,
direct-to-reverberant ratio.
Spatial aspects

0.2

0

A B C D E F
Ref.

A B C D E F
SDM L7

A B C D E F
SIRRL7

A B C D E F

A B C D E F

SIRR1 3

Anchor

Fig. 7. Rated similarity of different spatial encoding method for
each sample individually. The results are presented with mean and
95% confidence intervals.

respectively. For this reason, the anchor and the reference
are removed from the ANOVA examination and the statistical tests are run again. Indeed, when these two methods
are removed, Levene’s test shows that the variances can
be assumed equal [F(2,609) = 0.73, p > 0.05], and the
Anderson-Darling test statistic indicates that the residuals
are normally distributed [A2 * = 0.99, p < 0.05]. This means
that the ANOVA is suitable for the data.
The results of the ANOVA indicate that the only significant main effect is the spatial encoding method [Method,
F(2,576) = 332.80, p < 0.001] and none of the interactions
is found significant. In total, the model explains 56% of the
variance. The main effect for spatial encoding method is
very strong and it explains 49% of the variance, and thus
the remaining 7% are non-significant effects.
The results are presented for the spatial encoding method,
in Fig. 7 with means and 95% confidence intervals. As can
be seen from Fig. 7, out of the spatial encoding methods,
SDML7 is the most similar with the reference, SIRRL7
is the least similar, and SIRR13 is slightly more similar
than SIRRL7. All the means are significantly different and
the average values for the methods are: reference: 0.98,
SDML7: 0.80, SIRR13: 0.48, SIRRL7: 0.40, and Anchor:
0.00. Thus, according to the listening test experiments,
SDML7 is the most similar with the reference out of the
tested encoding methods. In the best cases, in samples A
and B (speech or trombone in large room), the results of
the reference and SDML7 are not significantly different.
In all the other samples, the SDML7 results are significantly different from the other methods and the reference.
The furthest from the reference are the results for sample E
(trombone in small room).
All the attributes from the interviews are listed in Table
5. They are grouped into two groups, spatial and timbral
aspects. The interviews of the test subjects revealed that
they most often used localization, spatial impression, muddiness, coloration, distance, and clarity as the attributes for
rating the samples.
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

Coloration (×7), muddiness (×4), clarity (×4), low-frequency
content (×2), pitch (×2), brightness (×2), tone, depth,
frequency shift, differences in the direct sound, metallic
reverb, artifacts at high frequencies, high-frequency content.

4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Advantages and Drawbacks of the SDM and
Future Work
In rendering, SDM uses only one omni-directional impulse response. Therefore, the frequency response in the
exact sweet spot is identical to the original one in the pressure microphone. That is, due to the direct use of the pressure microphone signal, no peaks or dips occur in the frequency response in the sweet spot. The spatial distribution
of sound can be inaccurate, but as the direct sound and early
reflections are accurately reproduced the perceived error is
negligible. In addition, in SDM the diffuse part of the sound
field is obtained automatically, whereas in SIRR the diffuse
part of sound is reproduced with uncorrelated loudspeaker
signals, which are not easy to implement.
SDM assumes wideband signals. That is, the room impulse responses should be measured with full band width.
In the case of band limited room impulse responses, SDM
will artificially increase the energy outside the frequency
band, since each sample in the encoded version is presented
by a Dirac-impulse.
In a real room impulse response, the energy in the high
frequencies decreases as time progresses due to air absorption and surface absorptions. Thus, the frequency response
of the late reverberation is a “low-pass” filtered version of
the original response of the direct sound. As pointed out by
the listening test subjects, SDM slightly increases the perceived brightness or high frequency content in the late part
of the impulse response. The division of the pressure signal
causes this drawback. An image-source represents each of
the samples in the pressure signal and the image-source is
a Dirac-impulse in time-domain, which is wide band in frequency domain. Since the late part of the impulse response
does not have as much energy on the high frequencies as
the early part this results in an increase in the perceived
brightness of the reverberation.
The problem of increased brightness in the late reverberation can be overcome by equalizing the frequency response
in a post-processing step. Another option is to analyze the
locations of the image-sources in frequency domain. This
way, each frequency would have a correct weighting to
25

TERVO ET AL.

begin with. This requires additional research and is therefore left for future work. In addition, future work includes
open source implementations of the SDM encoding for a
general pressure microphone array, B-format microphone,
and the decoding implementations for wave field synthesis
and higher order Ambisonics. The problem of increased
clarity may not be present in the other reproduction approaches.
In this paper the room acoustic simulation used ideal
specular reflections, which is an inherent property of the applied image-source room simulation method. SDM should
also be tested with diffuse reflections. However, the generation of the reference case for diffuse reflection is problematic, since for the reference case the direction, time of
arrival, and pressure value for each time instant is required.
This information is available in beam-tracer or ray-tracing
methods. Unfortunately, these methods neglect the temporal spreading of the reflections and consider that diffuse reflections only introduce spatial spreading for the reflected
sound. Moreover, the room acoustic simulation methods
that aim to solve the wave equation, e.g., finite element
method, boundary element method, and finite difference
in time-domain, may generate the correct pressure values,
but they do not produce directional information. The only
method that produces all the necessary information and
takes into account the temporal and spatial spreading is
presented in [35], but it only applies for low-frequencies.
The comparison for a reference case with diffuse reflections
is currently not possible.
SIRR was implemented with the parameters given in the
original paper [26]. It should be emphasized that the advances made in Directional Audio Coding could possibly
improve quality of the SIRR. In informal listening, for example, the multi-rate implementation [36] was found to
increase the overall quality in SIRR. Studies using SIRR
with alternative processing approaches are currently not
available in the literature.
5 CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented a spatial encoding method for spatial room impulse responses. The analysis of the method
estimates the location in very small time windows at every discrete time sample, where the localization method
depends on the applied microphone array and acoustic conditions. Each of the discrete time samples is therefore represented by an image-source. Thus, the analysis results in a
set of image-sources. Then, depending on the spatial reproduction method, the samples are distributed to several reproduction channels to obtain individual impulse responses
for all reproduction channels.
The main advantage of the method follows from the decomposition of the image-sources. Namely, the method can
be applied to any arbitrary microphone array and the spatial reproduction method can be any of a variety of existing
techniques. It should be emphasized that the method is not
designed for a continuous signal, but for spatial room impulse responses, which can then be convolved with an anechoic signal. In this paper the applied microphone array was
26

PAPERS

an open spherical microphone array with six microphones,
with an additional seventh microphone in the geometric
center of the array.
Listening test experiments showed that the presented
method produces sound that is indistinguishable from a
reference sound in the best case. In overall, the similarity
of the sound samples encoded with the presented method
were perceived to be closer than that of a state-of-the-art
method in the same conditions.
6 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by ERC grant agreement no.
[203636] and Academy of Finland agreement nos. [218238
and 140786]. The authors are grateful to Prof. Lauri Savioja,
Prof. Ville Pulkki, and Mr. Mikko-Ville Laitinen for discussions. The authors would also like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments, which helped to improve the quality of this paper. Dr. Alex Southern is thanked
for providing the implementation for air absorption filter
computations.
7 REFERENCES
[1] T. Lokki, H. Vertanen, A. Kuusinen, J. Pätynen, and
S. Tervo “Concert Hall Acoustics Assessment with Individually Elicited Attributes,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 130,
pp. 835–849 (Aug. 2011).
[2] T. Lokki, J. Pätynen, S. Tervo, S. Siltanen, and L.
Savioja, “Engaging Concert Hall Acoustics Is Made Up
of Temporal Envelope Preserving Reflections,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., vol. 129, pp. EL223–EL22 (Apr. 2011).
[3] J. Daniel, R. Nicol, and S. Moreau, “Further Investigations of High Order Ambisonics and Wavefield Synthesis for Holophonic Sound Imaging,” presented at the 114th
Convention of the Audio Engineering Society(2003 March),
convention paper 5788.
[4] A. J Berkhout, D. De Vries, and P. Vogel, “Acoustic
Control by Wave Field Synthesis,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 2764–2778 (1993).
[5] M. M. Boone, E. N. G. Verheijen, and P. F. Van Tol,
“Spatial Sound-Field Reproduction by Wave-Field Synthesis,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 43, pp. 1003–1012 (1995
Dec.).
[6] D. Hammershøi and H. Møller, Communication
Acoustics, chapter 9, “Binaural Technique—Basic Methods
for Recording, Synthesis, and Reproduction”, pp. 223–254
(Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, USA, 2005).
[7] D. Schönstein and B. F. G. Katz, “Variability in Perceptual Evaluation of HRTFs,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 60,
pp. 783–793 (2012 Oct.).
[8] V. Pulkki, “Virtual Sound Source Positioning Using Vector Base Amplitude Panning,” J. Audio Eng. Soc.,
vol. 45, pp. 456–466 (1997 Jun).
[9] F. Zotter and M. Frank, “All-Round Ambisonic Panning and Decoding,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 60, pp. 807–
820(2012 Oct.).
[10] J. Merimaa and V. Pulkki, “Spatial Impulse Response Rendering I: Analysis and Synthesis,” J. Audio Eng.
Soc., vol. 53, pp. 1115–1127 (2005 Dec.).
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

PAPERS

[11] J. B. Allen and D. A. Berkley, “Image Method for
Efficiently Simulating Small-Room Acoustics,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 943–950 (1979).
[12] U. P. Svensson, R. I. Fred, and J. Vanderkooy, “An
Analytic Secondary Source Model of Edge Diffraction Impulse Responses, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 106, pp. 2331–
2344 (1999).
[13] B. I. Dalenbäck, M. Kleiner, and P. Svensson, “A
Macroscopic View of Diffuse Reflection, J. Audio Eng.
Soc., vol. 42, pp. 793–807 (1994 Oct.).
[14] J.-M. Jot, L. Cerveau, and O. Warusfel, “Analysis
and Synthesis of Room Reverberation Based on a Statistical
Time-Frequency Model, presented at the 103rd Convention
of the Audio Engineering Society, Convention(1997 Sept.),
convention paper 4629.
[15] C. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and D. Florêncio, “Maximum
Likelihood Sound Source Localization for Multiple Directional Microphones,“IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 1, pp. 125–
128(2007).
[16] D. Levin, E. A. P. Habets, and S. Gannot, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Direction of Arrival Using
an Acoustic Vector-Sensor,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 131,
no. 2, pp. 1240–1248 (2012).
[17] S. Tervo, “Direction Estimation Based on Sound Intensity Vectors,“European Signal Processing Conference,
Glasgow, Scotland, August 24-28, pp. 700–704 (2009).
[18] S. Tervo, J. Pätynen, and T. Lokki, “Acoustic Reflection Localization from Room Impulse Responses,”
Acta Acustica united with Acustica, vol. 98, pp. 418–440
(2012).
[19] A. Host-Madsen, “On the Existence of Efficient
Estimators,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 48, no.
11, pp. 3028–3031 (2000).
[20] C. Knapp and G. Carter, “The Generalized Correlation Method for Estimation of Time Delay,” IEEE Trans.
Acoust., Speech and Signal Proc., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 320–
327 (1976).
[21] L. Zhang and X. Wu, “On Cross Correlation BasedDiscrete Time Delay Estimation,“IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
vol. 4, pp. 981–984 (2005).
[22] T. Pirinen, Confidence Scoring of Time Delay Based
Direction of Arrival Estimates and a Generalization to Difference Quantities, Ph.D. thesis, Ph.D. thesis, Tampere University of Technology, 2009. Publication; 854. Publication;
854.
[23] H. Kutruff, Room acoustics, 4th Ed.(Spon Press,
NY, NY, USA, 2000).

J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

SPATIAL DECOMPOSITION METHOD

[24] S. Tervo, T. Lokki, and L. Savioja, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Loudspeaker Locations from Room
Impulse Responses,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 59, pp. 845–
857 (2011 Nov.).
[25] A. Brutti, M. Omologo, and P. Svaizer, “Multiple Source Localization Based on Acoustic Map Deemphasis,” EURASIP J. Audio, Speech, and Music Processing, 2010, 2010, paper 147495.
[26] V. Pulkki and J. Merimaa, “Spatial Impulse Response Rendering II: Reproduction of Diffuse Sound and
Listening Tests,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 54, pp. 3–20 (2006
Jan./Feb.).
[27] J. Pätynen, S. Tervo, and T. Lokki, “Analysis
of Concert Hall Acoustics via Visualizations of TimeFrequency and Spatiotemporal Responses,” J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., vol. 133, no. 17 (January 2013).
[28] J. S. Bradley, H. Sato, M. Picard, et al., “On the
Importance of Early Reflections for Speech in Rooms,” J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 3233–3244 (2003).
[29] Geneva International Telecommunication Union.
ITU-R BS.1116-1: Methods for the Subjective Assessment
of Small Impairments in Audio Systems including Multichannel Sound Systems, 1997.
[30] H. E. Bass, H.-J. Bauer, and L. B. Evans, “Atmospheric Absorption of Sound: Analytical Expressions,” J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 52, no. 3B, pp. 821–825 (1972).
[31] T. Lokki, J. Pätynen, A. Kuusinen, and S. Tervo,
“Disentangling Preference Ratings of Concert Hall Acoustics Using Subjective Sensory Profiles,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
vol. 132, pp. 3148–3161 (Nov. 2012).
[32] J. Vilkamo, T. Lokki, and V. Pulkki, “Directional
Audio Coding: Virtual Microphone-Based Synthesis and
Subjective Evaluation,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 57, pp. 709
(2009 Sept.).
[33] B. B. Schultz, “Levene’s Test for Relative Variation,” Systematic Biology, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 449–456
(1985).
[34] M. A. Stephens, “EDF Statistics for Goodness of
Fit and Some Comparisons,” J. Am. Statistical Assoc., vol.
69, no. 347, pp. 730–737 (1974 Sept.).
[35] S. Siltanen, T. Lokki, S. Tervo, and L. Savioja,
“Modeling Incoherent Reflections from Rough Room Surfaces with Image Sources,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 132,
pp.4604–4614 (June 2012).
[36] T. Pihlajamäki and V. Pulkki, “Low-Delay Directional Audio Coding for Real-Time Human-Computer Interaction,” presented at the 130th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society (2011 May), convention paper
8413.

27

TERVO ET AL.

PAPERS

THE AUTHORS

Sakari Tervo

Jukka Pätynen

Dr. Sakari Tervo is a post-doctoral researcher in the Department of Media Technology, Aalto University School
of Science from where he also received a D.Sc. degree in
acoustics in January 2012. The topic of his research is on
the objective room acoustic measures.
Previously he has been working in the Department of
Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology from
where he also graduated as a M.Sc. majoring in audio signal processing in 2006. He has visited the Digital Signal Processing Group of Philips Research, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands, in 2007 and the Department of Electronics of
the University of York, United Kingdom, in 2010.

!

Dr. Jukka Pätynen was born in 1981 in Espoo, Finland. He received M.Sc. and D.Sc. (Tech.) degrees from
the Helsinki University of Technology, Finland, in 2007,
and Aalto University, Finland, in 2011, respectively. He
is currently working as a post-doctoral researcher in the
Department of Media Technology, Aalto University. His
research activities include room acoustics, musical acoustics, and signal processing.

!

Antti Kuusinen received an M.Sc. degree in March 2012.
He is currently working as a doctoral candidate at the De-

28
View publication stats

Antti Kuusinen

Tapio Lokki

partment of Media Technology at Aalto University School
of Science under supervision of professor Tapio Lokki. In
his doctoral research he focuses on the perceptual characteristics of concert hall acoustics. This research also includes development of descriptive vocabulary for sound,
music, and room acoustics as well as elaboration of listening test methodology and statistical data analysis.

!

Dr. Tapio Lokki was born in Helsinki, Finland, in 1971.
He has studied acoustics, audio signal processing, and computer science at the Helsinki University of Technology
(TKK) and received an M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering in 1997 and a D.Sc. (Tech.) degree in computer
science and engineering in 2002.
At present Dr. Lokki is an Associate Professor (tenured)
with the Department of Media Technology at Aalto University. Prof. Lokki leads the virtual acoustics team jointly with
Prof. Lauri Savioja. The research aims to create novel objective and subjective ways to evaluate concert hall acoustics. In addition, the team develops physically-based room
acoustics modeling methods to obtain authentic auralization. Furthermore, the team studies augmented reality audio. The team is funded by the Academy of Finland and by
Prof. Lokki’s Starting Grant from the European Research
Council (ERC).

J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 61, No. 1/2, 2013 January/February

