SEPTEMBER 09 2020

Effects of flow recirculation on acoustic and dynamic
measurements of rotary-wing systems operating in closed
anechoic chambers
Daniel Weitsman; James H. Stephenson; Nikolas S. Zawodny

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148, 1325–1336 (2020)
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

 
View
Online

Export
Citation

Articles You May Be Interested In
Effects of flow recirculation on unmanned aircraft system (UAS) acoustic measurements in closed
anechoic chambers
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (March 2019)

Experimental investigation of low Reynolds number rotor noise

Aeroacoustic and aerodynamic measurements at the rotor plane in the interaction of a small rotor with
wings
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (October 2024)

05 August 2026 13:46:01

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. (June 2021)

ARTICLE
...................................

Effects of flow recirculation on acoustic and dynamic
measurements of rotary-wing systems operating in closed
anechoic chambers
Daniel Weitsman,1,a) James H. Stephenson,2 and Nikolas S. Zawodny3
1

Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA
United States Army Combat Capabilities Development Command, Aviation and Missile Center, Hampton, Virginia 23681, USA
3
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia 23681, USA
2

ABSTRACT:
An experimental campaign was undertaken to identify the effects posed by flow recirculation on the dynamic
performance and acoustic emissions of an isolated rotor, operating in hover in a sealed anechoic chamber. It is
shown that flow recirculation is an artifact of testing rotary-wing systems in an enclosed environment, and results in
a significant amplification of tonal and broadband noise components. The acoustic emissions produced while the
recirculated flow is ingested into the rotor disk vary from those emitted by similar rotors operating in clean inflow
conditions. A variety of turbulence suppression screens were employed to impede the propagation of the rotor wake,
in an effort to delay the onset of recirculation. This mitigation strategy proved to be effective for one treatment configuration and significantly extended the duration available to acquire clean measurements. The presence of this
treatment is thought to alter the coherent structures comprising the recirculated flow and thus the noise emissions folC 2020 Acoustical Society of America. https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901
lowing the onset of flow recirculation. V

I. INTRODUCTION

Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS), which are
often rotary-wing in nature and considered to weigh less
than 55 lb (25 kg),1 have recently attracted attention from
commercial, private, and government sectors for their potential to be utilized in a wide array of applications, ranging
from postal delivery services to military reconnaissance
operations. This increased prominence has created a growing concern over their impact on community noise levels.
The acoustic emissions of rotary-wing systems are a result
of three primary aerodynamic noise generation mechanisms:
the displacement of the fluid medium by the rotor blades
(thickness source), the steady and unsteady pressure distributions on the blade surface (loading source), and off-body
effects like turbulence and shock formation (quadrupole
source).2–4 The aerodynamically generated noise sources are
common amongst all rotary-wing systems, however, their
individual contributions to the overall noise emissions vary
with the scale and operating conditions of the system.
The primary advantage of rotary-wing systems is their
ability to operate in hover. Researchers have begun to evaluate the aerodynamic performance and acoustic emissions of
sUAS in hover, while drawing comparisons to conventional
rotary-wing systems, such as helicopters.5–9 These studies
are conducted in anechoic chambers, where background
noise levels and sound reflections are minimized. However,
a)

Electronic mail: dfw5266@psu.edu

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

emulating free flight hover conditions in such a confined
environment becomes challenging due to the effects posed
by flow recirculation.
The generation of thrust results in the movement of
fluid and the formation of a rotor wake. In an enclosed
chamber, the wake propagates around the test facility and
upstream toward the rotor, where it is ingested by the
rotary-wing system. Due to the variety of coherent turbulent
structures comprising the recirculated flow, fluctuating loads
are imposed upon the rotor blades as it is ingested into the
rotor, thus altering the unsteady loading noise emissions of
the rotary-wing system.10–12
Piziali et al.13 conducted one of the first of only a few
studies dedicated to characterizing the effects posed by flow
recirculation. They tested a fully articulated, four bladed
rotor, in hover within an enclosed test facility and identified
large random variations from the mean thrust, torque, and
blade flapping measurements. Smoke flow visualization was
then used to reveal that large scale turbulent structures composing the recirculating flow were being ingested by the
rotor. Piziali et al. attributed the formation of the flow irregularities to the room geometry and the measurement fluctuations to the interactions between the rotor wake and the
returning recirculated flow. Since the aerodynamically generated noise of a rotary-wing system is a direct consequence
of blade loading, these dynamic variations have significant
implications on the system’s acoustic emissions.
More recently, Nardari et al.14 employed LatticeBoltzmann method (LBM) to simulate the acoustic and

0001-4966/2020/148(3)/1325/12/$30.00

C 2020 Acoustical Society of America
V

1325

05 August 2026 13:46:01

(Received 2 January 2020; revised 31 July 2020; accepted 16 August 2020; published online 9 September 2020)
[Editor: Anurag Agarwal]
Pages: 1325–1336

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

This experiment was conducted in the Small Hover
Anechoic Chamber (SHAC, formally known as the Small
Anechoic Jet Facility) at the NASA Langley Research
Center (LaRC). The test facility is treated with woven fiberglass acoustic wedges, which absorb 99% of incident sound
energy above 250 Hz. The interior dimensions (wedge tip to
wedge tip) of the facility measure 10.67 ft (3.25 m) in
1326

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

FIG. 1. Top view of the SHAC outlining microphone positions.

height, 8.38 ft (2.55 m) in width, and 12.67 ft (3.86 m) in
length. The previous use of this test facility required an inlet
and an outlet to facilitate flow as depicted in Fig. 1. To
ensure low background noise levels and that the full effects
of recirculation are observed, the inlet and outlet of the
SHAC are sealed with an acoustically treated baffle and
melamine foam wedges, respectively.
A total of six, 1/4 in. type 4939 free-field Br€uel & Kjaer
microphones, defined as M1–M6 in Fig. 1, are used to measure the acoustic emissions from the rotor. An azimuthal
array was not employed as the acoustic emissions of an isolated rotor in hover should be symmetric. Table I provides
the radial, axial, and polar locations of the microphones.
Since the microphone closest to the rotor, M4, is located at a
radial distance greater than 12 rotor radii from the rotor hub,
the microphones are considered to be located in the acoustic
far-field of the rotor.
A DJI 9450 Phantom 3 dual bladed rotor is selected for
this study because of its commercial availability and similarity to rotors utilized in previous studies at NASA LaRC.5,6
This rotor has a fixed pitch, a diameter of 9.4 in. (0.24 m),
and a weight of 0.43 oz (12.1 g). The rotor is mounted horizontally on an acoustically treated test stand as pictured in
Fig. 2, which positions the rotor plane 5.52 ft (1.68 m) from
the frontal edge of the inlet nozzle and elevates the rotor
hub 5.21 ft (1.59 m) above the floor of the test facility. The
rotor is driven by a DJI 2312 A motor. The rotational rate of
the motor is regulated by a DJI E300 15 A-OPTO electronic
speed controller (ESC), which receives pulse-width modulation commands from a Pololu Mini Maestro 12 channel
USB servo controller. The rotation rate of the motor is measured using a laser sensor-tachometer that provides a DC
voltage as well as a transistor-transistor logic pulse signal
indicating each subsequent revolution of the motor housing.
TABLE I. Microphone locations.

Radius (in)
Axial distance from M4 (in)
Elevation angle (h)

M1

M2

M3

M4

M5

M6

83.6
57.6
43.6

82.8
37.0
27.6

74.9
8.6
6.6

74.6
0
0

78.9
25.3
18.7

89.5
51.3
34.9

Weitsman et al.

05 August 2026 13:46:01

dynamic performance of a lightly loaded rotor, operating in
hover within a confined and unconfined environment.
Instantaneous visual renderings of the flow-field in the confined case revealed that the vortical structures composing the
inflow and slipstream were distorted in comparison to the
unconfined case, thus increasing the unsteady blade loading
and the unsteady loading noise emissions of the rotor. The
objective of this study is to document the magnitude of this
effect and to provide a potential mitigation strategy to limit it.
The irregularities composing the recirculated flow are
not encountered when a rotary-wing system is operating in
hover, outside of a confined environment in the absence of
wind gusts or ground effect, nor are they typically accounted
for in computational predictions. Therefore, if the intent of a
research campaign is to emulate the performance of a
rotary-wing system, hovering at quiescent conditions, it is
imperative that the effects of flow recirculation are mitigated. It has been suggested that the coherent structures
comprising the recirculated flow are comparable to those
induced by natural elements such as wind turbulence.14
However, due to the variability of atmospheric conditions,
in order to ascertain this claim, a comparative study between
the recirculated and ambient flow fields must be conducted.
Recirculation is inherent to operating a rotary-wing system in an enclosed environment, and although it has been
acknowledged in prior studies5,6,15,16 and analyzed from an
aerodynamic standpoint,13,17 to the authors’ knowledge,
aside from the findings of Nardari et al.,14 its impact on
acoustic measurements has yet to be thoroughly documented
in the literature. This causes new researchers in the field to
overlook the significance of recirculation, particularly considering that it is a transient phenomenon that is difficult to
detect. This article supplements the preliminary finding published by Stephenson et al.18 by providing a more comprehensive analysis of the results and a potential mitigation
strategy for delaying the onset of recirculation.
This mitigation strategy involves using woven screen
meshes as turbulence suppression devices, which function
similarly to flow straighteners commonly found in the inlet
of wind tunnels. These screen meshes establish a pressure
drop, effectively reducing the length scales and intensities
of the coherent structures comprising the rotor wake.19–21
The effectiveness of these screen meshes in delaying the
onset of recirculation depends on their geometric properties
and placement within the test facility. These parameters
were varied to identify the most effective mesh configuration for the test setup considered in this study.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

III. RESULTS
A. Baseline condition

Over the course of this test campaign, more than 350
data points were collected, corresponding to a slew of mesh

FIG. 2. (Color online) Test stand configuration including motor, rotor, and
load cell.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

TABLE II. Mesh specifications.

Mesh #
1
2
3
4
5
6

Model
number

Mesh opening
(lm)

Wire diameter
(lm)

% Open
area

07-115/36
07-180/46
07-1100/35N
07-2000/51
07-3400/60
07-5000/72

115
180
1100
2000
3400
5000

70
64
700
800
1000
900

36
46
35
51
60
72

treatment configurations and placements within the SHAC
facility. These data points are compared against baseline
measurements, which were acquired prior to the installation
of the mesh treatment. The spectrogram corresponding to
the baseline test condition is displayed in Fig. 3. It was generated using the acoustic data acquired with microphone M1
because loading noise is best observed at radiation angles
away from the rotor plane.5 The thrust and rotational rate
time histories are also presented in Fig. 3.
In order to ensure that no lingering turbulent structures
from previous trials contribute to the onset of recirculation,
quiescent ambient conditions were established in the chamber before beginning data acquisition. The rotor was initially
stationary and quickly brought up to the predetermined rotational rate. The duration of this ramp up region, which is
shown to occur 3.5 s after the start of the trial in Fig. 3, was
minimized to provide an ample timeframe to acquire measurements prior to the onset of recirculation.
Assessing the spectrogram reveals that the ramp up
region is followed by the clean region, which is sustained
from 3.5 to 7.4 s. The extents of the clean region were determined by tracking the standard deviation of the moving
mean of the filtered thrust time series. Since the standard
deviation reflects the magnitude of fluctuations in the signal,
any abrupt variations in the filtered thrust time series were
detected whenever the standard deviation exceeded a preset
tolerance condition. The tolerance condition chosen for this
data set was 0.0045, which is the average standard deviation
of the test point that exhibited the least amount of fluctuations. The longest time interval where this tolerance is not
surpassed corresponds to the clean region. In this region, the
sound pressure level (SPL) of the BPF remains steady at
approximately 42 dB and exceeds that of the corresponding
upper order harmonics, which are located at frequencies that
are integer multiples of the BPF. This is consistent with past
research on lightly loaded isolated rotors in hover.5 Note
that in this region the mean thrust of 0.76 lbf (3.38 N) and
the width of the thrust envelope remain constant. There are
also minimal fluctuations in the RPM.
The effects of recirculation becomes evident 7.4 s after
the beginning of the trial, in both the acoustic and dynamic
measurements, as shown on the right side of the spectrogram
in Fig. 3. The BPF harmonics are significantly amplified in
contrast to their SPL in the clean region, with the first three
harmonics exhibiting an amplification of nearly 20 dB. The
SPL of the BPF harmonics fluctuate due to the variety of the
Weitsman et al.

1327

05 August 2026 13:46:01

A six-component ATI-IA Mini40 multiaxis load cell is
employed to measure the generated torque and axial thrust.
The load cell is mounted behind the rotor-motor apparatus
via a thermal isolator made out of polycarbonate plastic.
The maximum error, as a percentage of the full scale load, is
0.75% for an axial load of 7.5 lbf (33.36 N) and 2% for a torque of 5 lbf-in. (0.23 Nm).
Considering that the duration prior to the onset of recirculation is a function of the room geometry, operational
thrust condition, and rotor size, a rotational rate of 5200
RPM is deemed adequate for providing a sufficient duration
to acquire clean measurements. This shaft rotational rate
corresponds to a blade passage frequency (BPF) of 173 Hz,
a figure of merit (FM) of 0.64, and a mean thrust and torque
of 0.76 lbf (3.38 N) and 0.48 lbf-in. (0.05 Nm), respectively.
The acoustic and dynamic data are acquired synchronously
for 20 s at a sampling rate of 80 kHz, using National
Instruments PXI-4472B dynamic signal acquisition modules
installed in a PXI 1045 chassis.
The acoustic measurements are visualized using spectrograms and narrowband spectra of specific time segments.
The spectrograms and narrowband spectra are computed
with a Hanning window and 75% overlap, and have a frequency resolution of 25 and 5 Hz, respectively. The periodic
noise components are extracted by calculating the RMS of
the ensemble-averaged pressure time history over a specific
number of shaft revolutions. This tonal extraction technique
is well documented by Zawodny et al.5 A fourth order low
pass Butterworth filter with a cutoff frequency of 150 Hz is
applied to the dynamic data sets for improved visual clarity.
Six different polyethylene terephthalate (PETP) woven
screen meshes are utilized as turbulence suppression devices. These meshes vary in their opening length, wire diameter, and percentage open area, as specified in Table II. The
meshes should have a sufficient percentage open area,
allowing the incident flow to penetrate them, while still providing an impedance to effectively reduce the mean flow
velocity and turbulence length scales. A large variety of
meshes are utilized in this study, as a priori information was
not available to guide the selection process. Henceforth, the
meshes will be referred to by their numerical designation.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

coherent structures being ingested by the rotor. The mean
thrust of 0.76 lbf (3.38 N) remains constant, while the width
of the thrust envelope modulates. There are also evident
fluctuations in the RPM. These features persist throughout
the remainder of the trial and are indicative of an increase in
unsteady loading on the rotor blades. The torque time series
was also examined, although it presented no distinct indications of turbulence ingestion.
The tones that reside at 4.9 and 7.3 kHz are believed to
be attributed to the electromagnetic forces that develop
within the motor casing, as they correspond to the eighth
and twelfth harmonic of the fundamental line frequency of
the supply current. The presence of these tones is consistent
with the findings of previous studies.22
To provide a more comprehensive insight into the effects
of recirculation, Fig. 4 presents a spectral representation of the
baseline acoustic measurements acquired using microphones
M1, M4, and M6, which correspond to locations above,
within, and below the rotor plane. The background noise,
motor only noise, narrowband random noise, and the extracted
periodic noise components of the first five BPF harmonics are
displayed in Fig. 4. These quantities were computed prior to
and following the onset of recirculation. It should be noted
that the motor only noise measurements were acquired without the rotor mounted. The unloaded motor likely exhibits different SPL from the loaded motor and should only serve as an
indication of the frequency content of the motor noise. The
spectral average prior to the onset of recirculation was computed between 4 and 6 s, as shown in Fig. 3, while the average
following the onset of recirculation was computed between 9
1328

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

and 11 s into the run. With a frequency resolution of 5 Hz, this
averaging interval yields an autospectral random uncertainty
of er ¼ 22:80%, which results in a random SPL uncertainty of
ur;SPL 2 f1:12; þ0:89g dB.23 The same time interval was
used to extract the periodic noise components of the BPF harmonics prior to the onset of recirculation. However, the amplitudes of the BPF harmonics following the onset of
recirculation were computed between 9 and 20 s into the run.
As shown in Fig. 3, prior to the onset of recirculation,
the SPL of the BPF surpasses that of the upper order harmonics at all three measurement locations. The SPL of the
BPF is also greater in the rotor plane, whereas the broadband noise levels are greater outside of the rotor plane.
These directivity trends in the acoustic emissions are
expected for a lightly loaded rotor.5
Since the amplitudes of the first five BPF harmonics are
extracted on a per revolution basis, only the deterministic noise
components that are associated with steady loading are
retained. Hence, the difference between the SPL of the
extracted BPF harmonics and the narrowband random noise
data accounts for the unsteady loading noise contributions.
Prior to the onset of recirculation, the extracted SPL of the BPF
harmonics are in close agreement with the narrowband random
noise outside of the rotor plane. Whereas, in the plane of the
rotor, the extracted SPL of the higher order BPF harmonics fall
below the narrowband data. This is attributed to the low signalto-noise ratio since the narrowband signal in this frequency
range is close to the noise floor of the test facility.
As presented in the spectrogram in Fig. 3 and the narrowband random spectra in Fig. 4, once recirculation
Weitsman et al.

05 August 2026 13:46:01

FIG. 3. (Color online) Spectrogram of microphone M1 data, thrust, and RPM showing recirculation effects.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

develops, the BPF harmonics are amplified at the three
microphone locations. The greatest tonal amplification is
evident outside of the rotor plane, where the first three BPF
harmonics are amplified by nearly 20 dB. It is important to
consider that these SPL fluctuate as shown in Fig. 3. The
broadband noise levels are also amplified, at all three measurement locations, following the onset of recirculation.
The extracted SPL of the BPF harmonics reveal some
similarities in the periodic noise components prior to, and
following the onset of recirculation. The SPL of the BPF
remains constant throughout the course of the trial at each
observer location. There is close agreement between the
SPL of the third BPF harmonic outside of the rotor plane
as well as the second and fourth BPF harmonic in the plane
of the rotor. Therefore, the significant tonal amplification
that is shown in the narrowband random spectra is attributed to unsteady loading and thus is not captured by the
tonal extraction technique. The difference between the
extracted periodic noise components for the remaining
BPF harmonics suggests that the ingestion of the recirculated flow has an effect on both the steady and unsteady
loading noise.
B. Recirculation mitigation

In order to delay the onset of recirculation the meshes
specified in Table II were utilized in a variety of configurations, as illustrated in Fig. 5. These configurations were
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

positioned in numerous locations throughout the SHAC
facility. The extensive number of mesh configurations and
placements were tested because an a priori method, such as
a sufficiently accurate model of the recirculation vortices,
was not available to determine the optimal arrangement for
the treatment.
Figure 6 outlines the effectiveness of each mesh treatment configuration at prolonging the duration of the clean
region, which spans from approximately 3.5 to 7.4 s for the
baseline condition, as shown in Fig. 3. Two measurement
points were acquired for each treatment configuration, however, due to the statistically random nature of the turbulent
structures comprising the recirculated flow there are slight
variations in its onset from trial to trial, even for the same
mesh treatment configurations. Therefore, the minimum and
maximum observed durations, prior to the onset of recirculation, are represented by the extents of the shaded regions in
Fig. 6. It is evident that several of the mesh configurations
adversely affect the duration of the clean region, since they
significantly alter the composition of the inflow. The downstream mesh configurations generally proved to be effective
at prolonging the time to acquire clean measurements,
which is further elongated with the inclusion of a second
downstream mesh.
The first configuration, pictured in Fig. 5(a), consists of
a single mesh positioned parallel to, and upstream of the
rotor plane, effectively conditioning the inflow to the rotor.
Weitsman et al.

1329

05 August 2026 13:46:01

FIG. 4. (Color online) Spectra from before and after recirculation manifests for microphones M1 (above), M4 (in plane), and M6 (below).

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

FIG. 6. (Color online) Effectiveness of mesh configurations.
1330

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

Weitsman et al.

05 August 2026 13:46:01

FIG. 5. (Color online) Examples of five tested mesh treatment configurations. (a) Upstream mesh. (b) Ducted mesh. (c) Orthogonal meshes. (d) Downstream
mesh. (e) Dual downstream meshes.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

The presence of recirculation, as shown in Fig. 7, indicates that the upstream meshes prove to be ineffective in
establishing isotropic inflow conditions and increasing the
duration prior to the onset of recirculation. These upstream
meshes are thought to introduce coherent structures from the
shedding of vortices off the individual wire strands, that are
not present at quiescent ambient conditions. This exemplifies how sensitive the acoustic emissions of a lightly loaded
rotor, operating in hover, are to slight variations in the
inflow conditions.
It was postulated that as the rotor wake propagates
upstream it is ingested from the side of the rotor. This
encouraged the development of the mesh configurations
illustrated in Figs. 5(b) and 5(c), which consist of a ducted
mesh enclosing the circumference of the rotor disk, as well
as two meshes positioned normal to, and on either side of
the rotor plane. The ducted and orthogonally positioned
mesh configurations were fabricated from mesh #5 and #3,
respectively. Similar to the single upstream mesh, these two
mesh configurations considerably altered the inflow conditions. Figure 8 displays the periodic noise components of
the first five BPF harmonics, prior to the onset of recirculation, for the baseline condition as well as the three additional
mesh configurations.
Figure 8 reveals that the inclusion of these three mesh
configurations considerably alters the inflow conditions, and
hence the acoustic emissions of the rotor. The two orthogonally positioned meshes cause the greatest amplification of
the periodic noise components of the higher order BPF harmonics, while attenuating the BPF by approximately 3 dB.

FIG. 7. (Color online) Spectrogram of microphone M1 data, thrust, and RPM showing recirculation effects with the installment of a single #3 mesh positioned one rotor diameter upstream of the rotor plane.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

Weitsman et al.

1331

05 August 2026 13:46:01

The six meshes specified in Table II were separately positioned at 0.5, 1, 2, and 3.3 rotor diameters in front of the
rotor plane. It was speculated that if the meshes were positioned too far upstream, the recirculated flow may bypass
them entirely, whereas if positioned too close to the rotor
plane, the meshes may significantly influence the inflow
entering the rotor disk.
Figure 7 displays the dynamic and acoustic measurements that were captured with microphone M1, which is
located above the rotor plane, following the installation of a
single #3 mesh positioned one rotor diameter upstream of
the rotor plane. This mesh configuration yields a clean
region of approximately 3 s. It is interesting to note that the
BPF harmonics are amplified in the clean region for this
configuration in comparison to the baseline condition, for
which the spectrogram is presented in Fig. 3. This amplification indicates that the upstream mesh distorts the inflow to
the rotor, although not to the same extent as the recirculated
flow.
The mean thrust and rotational rate of 0.76 lbf (3.38 N)
and 5200 RPM are consistent with those observed for the
baseline condition. This suggests that the mean dynamic
quantities are minimally sensitive to variations in the inflow
produced by the upstream mesh prior to the onset of recirculation. As recirculation manifests, 6.75 s after the beginning
of the trial, the harmonics of the BPF are amplified sequentially, starting from the second harmonic. The SPL of the
BPF is sporadically amplified by nearly 10 dB and is accompanied by increased modulations of the thrust envelope and
fluctuations of the rotational rate.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

FIG. 8. (Color online) Comparison of periodic noise components for different mesh configurations, extracted from microphone M1 data.

FIG. 9. (Color online) Spectrogram of microphone M1 data, thrust, and RPM showing recirculation effects with the installment of mesh #3 positioned 6
rotor diameters downstream of the rotor plane.
1332

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

Weitsman et al.

05 August 2026 13:46:01

The presence of the ducted mesh configuration also appears
to amplify the higher order BPF harmonics. It is interesting
to note that with the installment of the single upstream mesh
the fourth BPF harmonic is attenuated in comparison to the
baseline condition.
The six meshes were also positioned parallel to, and aft,
of the rotor plane, as pictured in Fig. 5(d), at 3.3, 4, 5, and 6
rotor diameters downstream of the rotor plane. The proximity of the meshes to the rotor plane was limited by the test
stand, however this ensured that the meshes were positioned
sufficiently far downstream that their presence has a minimal effect on the contraction of the rotor wake. This mesh
configuration impedes the rotor wake before it propagates

throughout the chamber. Figure 9 displays the measurements corresponding to a single #3 mesh positioned 6 rotor
diameters downstream of the rotor plane.
Figure 9 reveals that with the installation of the single
downstream mesh, the duration of the clean region was
extended to 6.25 s, as compared to the 3.9 s shown in Fig. 3.
The presence of the downstream mesh also has a minimal
impact on the mean thrust and rotational rate. The effects of
recirculation are still present, suggesting that this mesh configuration slows the propagation of the rotor wake but does
not fully eliminate the coherent structures comprising the
wake. As recirculation sets in, approximately 9.5 s after the
beginning of the trial, the higher order BPF harmonics are
amplified prior to the second or third harmonics. Similarly
to what was observed in Fig. 7, this sequential amplification
is likely attributed to the break up of coherent structures,
which are of the length scales that influence the amplitudes
of the first several BPF harmonics.
To further prolong the duration of the clean region,
mesh #4 and #3 were positioned 3.3 and 6 rotor diameters
downstream of the rotor plane, respectively, as pictured in
Fig. 5(e). The spectrogram and dynamic measurements corresponding to this treatment configuration are shown in
Fig. 10. As indicated in Fig. 6, the dual downstream mesh
configuration yields the best results for mitigating the effects
of recirculation for this specific experimental setup, increasing the duration of the clean region to 10 s. However,
approximately 13 s after beginning the trial, the effects of
recirculation do become apparent. The onset of recirculation

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

differs from what was presented in Fig. 3 in that the BPF
harmonics are gradually amplified as the width of the thrust
envelope increases, and there are minimal fluctuations in the
rotational rate. This is believed to be attributed to the ingestion of lingering coherent structures that remain in the recirculated flow. There is further evidence of sequential
amplification, as illustrated in Fig. 9, where the higher order
BPF harmonics are initially amplified. These variations in
the onset of recirculation support the notion that the acoustic
emissions of an open rotor alter in accordance with the composition of the inflow.
Figure 11 presents the narrowband spectra computed
using the measurements acquired prior to the onset of recirculation, with and without the inclusion of the dual downstream mesh treatment. The spectral average prior to the
installation of the mesh treatment was computed over
the same two second interval as the spectra in Fig. 4, while
the spectral average following the installation of the treatment was computed over a duration of 7 s. This extended
averaging interval yields an autospectral random uncertainty
of er ¼ 11:85%, which translates to a random SPL uncertainty of ur;SPL 2 f0:55; þ0:49g dB. The effect of decreasing the random SPL uncertainty is evident by the reduction
in variance of the SPL at frequencies exceeding 1 kHz. The
close agreement between the spectra shown in Fig. 11
reveals that the presence of the downstream meshes has a
minimal impact on the acoustic measurements at low frequencies, however the tonal noise components at frequencies above 2 kHz are slightly amplified. This is thought to be
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

attributed to acoustic reflections off the mesh holder apparatus, and thus if these mesh holders were upholstered in
acoustically absorbent material this high frequency tonal
amplification may be attenuated.
To further exemplify the influence of the dual downstream mesh configuration on acoustic measurements, the
steady tonal noise components of the first five BPF harmonics, prior to the onset of recirculation, are presented in
Fig. 12 for the baseline and dual downstream mesh configurations. The steady amplitudes of the BPF harmonics were
extracted between 4 and 6 s into the run for the baseline condition, and from 4 to 11 s for the dual downstream mesh
configuration. Figure 12 generally shows a close agreement
between the steady amplitudes of the BPF harmonics, however the third and fourth BPF harmonics are attenuated by
approximately 5 dB with the inclusion of the mesh treatment. It is inferred that the dual downstream mesh configuration breaks up the turbulent eddies that contribute to the
amplification of these harmonics when ingested by the rotor.
However, the close agreement between the narrowband
spectra of the two data sets, as shown in Fig. 11, affirms that
the dual mesh treatment has a minimal influence on the
overall SPL.
In addition to evaluating the effect that the mesh treatments have on acoustic measurements, it is important to
consider their impact on the dynamic measurements.
Figure 13 presents the time-averaged thrust and power coefficients that were computed on a per-revolution basis with a
95% level of confidence, using dynamic measurements
Weitsman et al.

1333

05 August 2026 13:46:01

FIG. 10. (Color online) Spectrogram of microphone M1 data, thrust, and RPM showing recirculation effects with the installment of two downstream
meshes.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

acquired prior to and following the onset of recirculation,
for the six mesh treatment configurations illustrated in
Figs. 5(a)–5(e). For the baseline condition, in the absence of
the mesh treatment, there is minimal variation in the average
thrust coefficient before and after recirculation manifests in
the chamber, whereas the power coefficient does decrease
following the onset of recirculation. This reduction in
power, for a given thrust condition, resembles the performance of a rotor operating in ground effect.24 As Piziali

FIG. 12. (Color online) Comparison of the periodic noise components,
extracted from microphone M1 data, between the baseline and dual downstream mesh configurations prior to the onset of recirculation.
1334

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

et al.13 suggested, it is believed that the recirculated flow
interacts and reduces the velocity of the slipstream after
deflecting off the back wall of the test chamber. In accordance with momentum theory, as a result of this reduction
in the slipstream velocity, the induced velocity at the plane
of the rotor and thus the dynamic quantities also decrease.
These effects are more pronounced for the single upstream
mesh configurations, for which both the average thrust and
power coefficients are reduced following the onset of recirculation. This supports the notion that the upstream mesh
configuration considerably alters the nature of the inflow,
which is particularly evident once recirculation fully develops in the test facility. The variation in the thrust and power
coefficients following the onset of recirculation remain
within the measurement uncertainties of the baseline condition for the rest of the treatment configurations.
It is interesting to note the close agreement of the two
dynamic quantities, prior to and following the onset of recirculation, with the implementation of the downstream mesh
configurations. This suggests that both the single and dual
downstream mesh configurations minimize the effect of
recirculation on the time-averaged dynamic measurements.
The downstream meshes are believed to sufficiently dissipate the energy of the rotor wake, and perhaps the recirculated flow as it propagates upstream towards the rotor plane.
Thus, the recirculated flow has a minimal impact on the
induced velocity, once it reaches the rotor plane. However,
Weitsman et al.

05 August 2026 13:46:01

FIG. 11. (Color online) Comparison of microphone M1 (above), M4 (in-plane), and M6 (below) spectra prior to recirculation, before and after the installment of the dual downstream mesh treatment.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

the recirculated flow likely still contains irregularities that
are not present in the clean inflow, which account for the
increased fluctuations in the thrust measurements. This is
depicted in Figs. 9 and 10 by the gradual expansion in the
envelope of the thrust time histories. The average thrust and
power coefficients corresponding to the dual mesh treatment
configuration lie within the uncertainty bounds of the baseline condition, prior to the onset of recirculation. Therefore,
the dual downstream mesh configuration mitigates the
effects of recirculation on the averaged dynamic measurements, effectively preserving the operating conditions of the
baseline case, prior to the onset of recirculation.
IV. CONCLUSION

In this study, the effects posed by the ingestion of recirculated flow on the acoustic and dynamic measurements of
an open rotor operating in hover were identified and a mitigation strategy was proposed to extend the duration to
acquire clean measurements. Recirculation is an artifact of
operating rotary-wing systems in an enclosed facility, and
occurs when the rotor wake propagates throughout the test
facility and is subsequently ingested by the rotor. This
results in unsteady blade loading, which is evident in
the amplification of the BPF harmonics, modulations of the
thrust envelope, and fluctuations of the rotational rate. Once
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

1

J. S. Duncan, “AC 107-2—Small unmanned aircraft systems,” part 107,
Federal Aviation Administration (2016).
2
J. E. Ffowcs Williams and D. L. Hawkings, “Sound generation by turbulence and surfaces in arbitrary motion,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London,
Ser. A: Math. Phys. Sci. 264(1151), 321–342 (1969).
Weitsman et al.

1335

05 August 2026 13:46:01

FIG. 13. (Color online) Comparison of the thrust and power coefficient
computed prior to and following the onset of recirculation for six treatment
configurations.

flow recirculation manifests within the test facility, the
hover performance of the rotary-wing system is no longer
indicative of that in quiescent free flight, outside of a confined environment. Therefore, if the intent of a researcher is
to emulate hover conditions with clean inflow, care must be
taken to eliminate coherent turbulent structures in the recirculated flow and delay the propagation of the rotor wake.
Prior to the installation of the treatment, the observed
duration to acquire uncorrupted measurements was 3.9 s, as
shown in Fig. 3. This duration is highly dependent upon the
room geometry, operational thrust condition, and size of the
rotor. Woven screen meshes were employed in a variety of
configurations in order to provide an impedance to the rotor
wake. Two meshes positioned parallel to, and aft of the rotor
plane, yielded the best results, extending the duration prior
to the onset of recirculation to approximately 10 s. This
increased averaging interval decreased the autospectral random uncertainty from 22.80% for the baseline condition to
11.85%.
The presence of this mesh treatment proved to have a
minimal impact on acoustic measurements at low frequencies. However, a slight amplification of the tonal noise components was evident at frequencies above 2 kHz and is
attributed to reflections off the mesh holder apparatus. The
dynamic performance of the rotor was shown to not be sensitive to the presence of the dual downstream mesh configuration, which proved to alleviate the effects of recirculation
on the dynamic measurements.
The implementation of this mesh treatment enables
researchers to acquire clean measurements for longer durations or to operate their rotary-wing systems at higher thrust
conditions, while maintaining clean inflow conditions.
Additionally, this mitigation strategy shows potential for
expanding the capabilities of existing test facilities to
accommodate larger isolated rotors or multi-rotor sUAS.
This has been exemplified by Whiteside et al.25 who
employed this recirculation mitigation strategy while testing
a coaxial rotor configuration in the SHAC.
In follow-up studies, flow visualization would aid in
determining where the primary recirculation vortices form
and how they propagate throughout the test facility. This
would provide a more comprehensive method for determining the optimal placement of the mesh treatment.
Furthermore, a larger data set that includes alternative rotor
geometries, operating at various thrust conditions, and in
different sized test facilities, would serve as a basis for
developing a generalized method for predicting the duration
prior to the onset of recirculation for arbitrary experimental
setups. This would allow researchers to identify the limitations posed by their specific setups for a variety of rotarywing systems.

https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001901

3

1336

J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 148 (3), September 2020

15

C. R. Russell, J. Jung, G. Willink, and B. Glasner, “Wind tunnel and
hover performance test results for multicopter UAS vehicles,” in
Proceedings of the 72nd Annual Forum of the American Helicopter
Society, West Palm Beach, FL (2016).
16
D. Boxwell, Y. Yu, and F. Schmitz, “Hovering impulsive noise: Some
measured and calculated results,” in Proceedings of the International
Specialists Symposium on Helicopter Acoustics, NASA Langley Research
Center, Hampton, VA (1978).
17
M. McCoy, A. J. Wadcock, and L. A. Young, “Documentation of the
recirculation in a closed-chamber rotor hover test,” Technical Report No.
NASA/TM-2016-219162, NASA (2016).
18
J. H. Stephenson, D. Weitsman, and N. S. Zawodny, “Effects of flow
recirculation on unmanned aircraft system (UAS) acoustic measurements
in closed anechoic chambers,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 145(3), 1153–1155
(2019).
19
E. Laws and J. Livesey, “Flow through screens,” Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech.
10(1), 247–266 (1978).
20
J. Groth and A. V. Johansson, “Turbulence reduction by screens,” J. Fluid
Mech. 197, 139–155 (1988).
21
R. Pinker and M. Herbert, “Pressure loss associated with compressible
flow through square-mesh wire gauzes,” J. Mech. Eng. Sci. 9(1), 11–23
(1967).
22
B. S. Henderson and D. Huff, “Electric motor noise for small quadcopters: Part II-source characteristics and predictions,” in
Proceedings of the 2018 AIAA/CEAS Aeroacoustics Conference,
Atlanta, GA (2018).
23
J. Bendat and A. Piersol, Random Data: Analysis and Measurement
Procedures, Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics (Wiley, New York,
2011).
24
J. Leishman, Principles of Helicopter Aerodynamics, Cambridge
Aerospace Series (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2016).
25
S. Whiteside, N. Zawodny, X. Fei, N. A. Pettingill, M. D. Patterson, and
P. Rothhaar, “An exploration of the performance and acoustic characteristics of UAV-scale stacked rotor configurations,” in Proceedings of the
AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum, San Diego, CA (2019).

Weitsman et al.

05 August 2026 13:46:01

F. Farassat, “Theory of noise generation from moving bodies with an
application to helicopter rotors,” Contractor Report No. NASA-CR-451,
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA (1975).
4
K. S. Brentner and F. Farassat, “Modeling aerodynamically generated
sound of helicopter rotors,” Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 39(2-3), 83–120 (2003).
5
N. S. Zawodny, D. D. Boyd, Jr., and C. L. Burley, “Acoustic characterization and prediction of representative, small-scale rotary-wing unmanned
aircraft system components,” in Proceedings of the 72nd Annual Forum
of the American Helicopter Society, West Palm Beach, FL (2016).
6
N. S. Zawodny and D. D. Boyd, Jr., “Investigation of rotor-airframe interaction noise associated with small-scale rotary-wing unmanned aircraft
systems,” in Proceedings of the 73rd Annual Forum of the American
Helicopter Society, Fort Worth, TX (2017).
7
G. Sinibaldi and L. Marino, “Experimental analysis on the noise of propellers for small UAV,” Appl. Acoust. 74(1), 79–88 (2013).
8
K. Herreman, “Proposed measurement method for UAV sound levels,” in
Proceedings of the New England Noise Con-16: Revolution in Noise
Control, Providence, RI (2016), Vol. 8, pp. 615–622.
9
C. E. Tinney and J. Sirohi, “Multirotor drone noise at static thrust,” AIAA
J. 56(7), 2816–2826 (2018).
10
D. B. Hanson, “Spectrum of rotor noise caused by atmospheric
turbulence,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 56(1), 110–126 (1974).
11
R. W. Paterson and R. K. Amiet, “Noise of a model helicopter rotor due
to ingestion of turbulence,” Contractor Report No. NASA-CR-3213,
NASA (1979).
12
J. C. Simonich, R. H. Schlinker, and R. K. Amiet, “Experimental assessment of helicopter rotor turbulence ingestion noise in hover,” Contractor
Report No. NASA-CR-181792, NASA (1989).
13
R. A. Piziali and F. F. Felker, “Reduction of unsteady recirculation in
hovering model helicopter rotor testing,” J. Am. Helicopter Soc. 32(1),
54–59 (1987).
14
C. Nardari, D. Casalino, F. Polidoro, V. Coralic, P.-T. Lew, and J. Brodie,
“Numerical and experimental investigation of flow confinement effects
on UAV rotor noise,” in Proceedings of the 25th AIAA/CEAS
Aeroacoustics Conference, Delft, the Netherlands (2019).

